Cynthia M Sims: Good morning. How are you.
Dr. Christina Campbell: Okay.

Cynthia M Sims: You have a good week.
Dr. Christina Campbell: Get warmer.

Cynthia M Sims: Can I call you Christina.
Dr. Christina Campbell: Yes, when I signed up for Zoom, it's in my original sign up. So it just automatically says Doctor there, and I never went back into the system and changed it. But Christina's just fine. I think last time under participant, but I didn't see where it says Rename, I just see PIN and edit profile picture. So I was like, it doesn't show it, and I'll just leave it. But Christina is fine.

Cynthia M Sims: Well, good morning. It's good to see you.
Dr. Christina Campbell: Morning, everyone.
Pipiet Larasatie: Good morning!

Cynthia M Sims: So how have you been? Why don't we go ahead? And just do—I like to do a 3 word check in—so 3 words, and you can verbalize it. So 3 words, how are you doing.
Pipiet Larasatie: I can start—so tired but excited. So many things happen. So we are trying to purchase a home. Thank you. But it's actually like, I don't know, is it like blessing in disguise, or something like that? Because we just moved to this area 4 months ago, and we were surprised that the housing price is crazy. And we thought that we couldn't afford anything. But then in one time I felt that everything is kind of already prepared, like flow in the way beyond my power. We met a fabulous agent, house agent, and then we met a house loan lender, and they say that, hey, since you are here under visa, you need to be working very fast because the new administration didn't give—what do you call it—FHA, USDA, first home, something loan anymore to non-resident. So I only got less than 2 weeks to get something and sign something with the house seller.

Cynthia M Sims: So 3 words, how are you doing.
Pipiet Larasatie: Those two weeks were hectic, but we got something, so we are waiting for the underwriting process. Yes, excited. And then I actually, right now, I'm writing a grant—trying to apply for something with USDA, in which they almost freeze anything except this specific program. And the due is tomorrow. So I was like, but I'm excited.
Dr. Racheida Lewis (she/her): I would also echo, tired and excited. And then I'm gonna throw in anxious. Tired because I'm still recovering from my honeymoon. Excited because I just got married, so I'm still on that high. Anxious because summer classes start tomorrow, and I teach a summer camp next week, so there's a lot of things that have to be done to prepare for essentially getting back into the swing of things and being with high school students for a week next week.
Dr. Christina Campbell: I am warm. Our air conditioner broke, so I'm gonna have to take care of that after class. And it's hot here in Atlanta. I think I feel a bit slow right now in terms of some of the things that are happening, and I'm also excited because I will be going on vacation in less than two weeks—on the 16th. So I'm really looking forward to officially pausing.

Cynthia M Sims: Does that help.
Pipiet Larasatie: Yes, and in this session we supposed to have 4.
Pipiet Larasatie: Just want to make sure. So this is kind of like a cohort, like a group that we will be working together until the end of session, okay.
Cynthia M Sims: Can you imagine session with 16 people wouldn't work? Well, okay.
Pipiet Larasatie: Sure! Thanks.

Cynthia M Sims: Okay, any questions on any of that.
(No answers were given.) 

Cynthia M Sims: What might that look like? So when you assert leadership? And it's okay to, you know. Take your—to share verbally what are some of the things that you've done to assert your leadership?
Pipiet Larasatie: I want to share. So I think, like, unfortunately, physical appearance is something that people will take a look at, at least for the first three seconds or so. I learned from the hardest way. I look younger than my age—not to compliment myself—but I felt that in the university, in conference, academia settings, everybody always thinks that I am a PhD student rather than a professor, and they always say it's because I look young. So when I have a gray hair, I'm so happy, like I try to kind of—can I have more gray hair, you know? And then I try to deliberately wear at least a blazer or coat that I usually, you know, get it from T.J.Maxx or Ross.

Cynthia M Sims: What might that look like? So when you assert leadership? And it's okay to, you know. Take your—to share verbally what are some of the things that you've done to assert your leadership?
Pipiet Larasatie: I think, like, unfortunately, physical appearance is something that people will take a look at, at least for the first three seconds or so. I learned from the hardest way. I look younger than my age—not to compliment myself—but I felt that in university, in conference, academia settings, everybody always thinks that I am a PhD student rather than a professor, and they always say it's because I look young. So when I have a gray hair, I'm so happy, like I try to kind of—can I have more gray hair? And then I try to deliberately wear at least a blazer or coat that I usually get from T.J.Maxx or Ross so that I can look more professional in the sense that probably people, hopefully, can distinguish me from students. So that's my first way to show my identity. The second way is like they will change—these people who have probably prejudice or previous perceptions—they will immediately change their perception when they talk with me. Once they know that I am knowledgeable, they understand, or kind of change their mind, that, oh, she is—a professor.
Dr. Christina Campbell: One of the things—I'm in a lot of white spaces often. And so one of the things that I noticed that I'll do, I'll speak up in terms of sharing my background and orientation. So I'll take the time to share things that I believe will make me be viewed as more credible in the space, like how long I've been doing the work that I've been doing. Part of that also has to do with—I might look slightly younger than I actually am. So I will tell people I've been doing justice work for 20 years, and I'll start giving examples and sharing where I went to school, not because I actually care about those things, but I notice sometimes in these spaces they care about those things, and so I'll just share accordingly.
Dr. Racheida Lewis (she/her): I don't know if this necessarily counts, but I don't accept or tolerate being talked over. It's very much reminiscent of what grade school teachers do: if people are talking while I'm talking, and I'm the one that's supposed to be talking, I just stop and stand there, and maybe I'll say that I'll wait. Then they get the message and they're just like, okay. So, anyways, as I was saying, and then I continue speaking on what I was talking about.

Cynthia M Sims: And so granting means that in social interactions. And so what might be some examples of people granting your leadership.
Pipiet Larasatie: I can give an example. For example, the grant that I'm pursuing right now—it's a collaboration, multidisciplinary, and I'm the youngest one. I felt that they kind of need someone to manage and do 99.9% of the work, so they consider me as, or grant me, the leadership because they need someone to do all of the work.
Dr. Christina Campbell: I find that, depending on what church I'm involved in, even if I'm not an expert in a specific area, there is a level of granting that happens because people might watch other characteristics like stewardship or patience. They will say, okay, based on these attributes, we think you'll be good at something completely different, like, you're with social media, and I'm like, you know I'm not.

Cynthia M Sims: So hopefully, you've had a chance to think about your leader meter. And so your goal was to color or shade in the leader meter to represent how much you see yourself as a leader. So did you all have a chance to shade in your leader meter?
Pipiet Larasatie: Yes.

Cynthia M Sims: Okay. So I'm going to stop sharing. So why don't you go ahead? And I'm going to ask you to share your leader meter. And then we're going to talk about it. So who'd like to go ahead and share theirs? So why don't we do popcorn? So Pipette will go first, then Christina, and then Rashida.
Pipiet Larasatie: Yeah. Okay, I'm—I will share my screen. Have you seen my leader meter? Yeah. I feel that my leader meter is like a thermometer—it will be different, up and down, depending on the day. I don't know. That's what I feel like, particularly right now. I feel that my leader meter is kind of like full, because back to my grant application, I feel that, like, almost 99.9% I did everything by myself, and I would say that until the due tomorrow I will still be doing everything by myself. So my leader meter in that sense is kind of on the top. But probably next week, when I have different circumstances, it will be different.
Dr. Christina Campbell: I just put the percentage—like, I put half full. And I answered the reflection questions. For me, I go back and forth whether or not I want to own being a leader or not.
Dr. Racheida Lewis (she/her): Can you give me a moment because I'm trying to find my leader meter drawing? Actually, I'm looking to pull it up.

Cynthia M Sims: Okay, well, I think you all have gotten into sort of the next set of questions. So so why don't you share and chat some of so how do you—so how do you do leadership? So why don't you share in chat some of the ways that you claim your leadership or assert leadership? And so why don't we start there? I think you've been talking about that, and is there? So why don't we start there. So how do you claim leadership? So what part of the things that you do? When you filled in that circle? What? What are those behaviors look like.

Dr. Racheida Lewis (she/her): So for me it feels very much like being very authentic. So one thing that anyone who knows me, sort of generally—socially, personally, or whatever—knows is that I'm a fan of music. And so one way that I assert leadership, or manage leadership in my classroom, is that I play music. So I'm in engineering. There are times where, before class, there's music playing. Sometimes I'll give them an assignment where they're supposed to work things out within a group, or independently, however they choose, and then we'll solve it together as a class with me at the board. But I essentially say, all right, you get a song or two songs to try to do this problem. And it's also an open playlist—my students have access to that link, and they can add songs that they like to it as well. So that's one way that immediately comes to my mind when I think about how I demonstrate the type of leader I am—one that's authentic to me, but also very collaborative with the people I'm working with. So yes, they are my students, but I don't necessarily control the music. I mean, I do because I play it, but the playlist that I play from is literally a compilation of playlists, or a compilation of songs over the past six years that I've been teaching. I've added songs to it, but a lot of the songs actually come from my students.

Cynthia M Sims: Other examples of asserting leadership.

Dr. Christina Campbell: One way I like to assert my leadership is recognizing if I have privilege and power within the space, and thinking about how I can leverage my privilege to benefit things like diversity and social justice. If you don't want a diverse pool, don't put me on the application committee. Don't put me in charge of selecting the core grad students. If you don't really care about retention, you don't want me involved. I also pride myself on being strategic, and I get a lot of joy out of problem solving. No matter how complicated something is, I try to figure out how we can leverage any strengths, assets, or privileges to our benefit and maximize that so we can solve an issue or problem. Anytime I feel like, whether it's education, privilege, or network or resource, and I can use that to leverage support or advancement of myself, my community, the village, or students, then I'll do that—even if it's not with a big voice, just in a silent way where people can get the support they need.

Pipiet Larasatie: I can echo some of what was previously shared. For me, it's definitely two things that work in my case: one, doing the work, and second, being the brain. Doing the work could be in the case of a grant application or planning for an expo, seminar, or conference. Being the brain is like when I have a graduate student and need to lead the research project, I need to show them the way. So I guess those two things from my side are additional ways—being the thought leader.

Cynthia M Sims: So talk a little bit about how your leadership is recognized or granted by others.

Pipiet Larasatie: For me, it's more about—in the university workplace setting, people see me as successful at getting grants in the past, so they believe in me and believe that I can lead. The collaboration team consists of multiple people across departments and colleges, and I have a history of successful applications. For graduate students, I think they see the same thing—they see that I have a long history of mentoring graduate students. Even when I was doing my PhD, I had multiple undergraduate research assistants, and not only showed them the process but also produced outcomes, such as publications. These undergraduate research assistants that I was working with usually became my second authors in the publication.

Cynthia M Sims: So talk a little bit about how your leadership is recognized or granted by others.

Dr. Christina Campbell: I think I've shown up in ways for students in terms of being a mentor that is supportive and creates space for them to thrive. I try not to create Mini me's, but I really try to get students to envision what is an individualized, professional and personal journey that makes sense for them. I just see myself as a resource, and they have to strategically prepare a professional development plan. I give them a template, we walk through it, and they see me as just one piece of that. But it's worked out really well for students in terms of what they start with versus what they leave with. Because of the work I've done with students and how I've interacted with them, they tend to feel safe. I think they end up doing more than they could imagine, because I don't have to control things, and people have room to grow and to ask important questions. There's some structure and expectations, but they never feel stuck, because I just want what's best for them in their vision. From the student perspective as a professor, the mentoring has stuck out. For my faculty colleagues, there's been a few times where the chair will ask me to show up to a meeting or setting—I'm like, you're the chair, you're supposed to be managing this—and sometimes they have said I might ask questions or be able to help with some resolution, or they might say the way I say something may not feel so tense, and they might like the approach in terms of how I share something. There have been times where maybe something has happened within faculty, something's unresolved, and they'll say we need a third person, and they'll pick me and I'll come. I think that could also be an element of leadership where people trust that you could be that third person or the mediator.

Dr. Racheida Lewis (she/her): I would say that my leadership gets affirmed or asserted by others when I get tapped to do things. Despite me feeling very much not like a leader in certain spaces, I'm still being asked to collaborate on grants or be on advisory board panels and things. So while it's, I always agree, but sometimes it's just like, Oh, wow! Really, me? When I think about some other people that they could call, they call me, and even though it stirs up feelings of being an imposter in some ways, it feels reaffirming that even though I'm struggling with this space or identity, there are people who are recognizing the work that I'm doing or trying to do, and that can be very validating.

Cynthia M Sims: So let's think about those areas of your leader meter that were not filled in. What behaviors can help you strengthen your leader identity? So what could help you? Fill in those gaps? Do you want to fill in those gaps.
Dr. Christina Campbell: I think I'm a sucker for external validation—that's not always good. But I could benefit probably from a leadership mentor, because I do second-guess this idea of being a leader. Being mentored in that area would probably allow me to move forward with more confidence in things that I feel like I'm supposed to be doing but haven't really moved forward with diligently. I'm moving forward but slowly, with hesitancy, because there are areas that I am strategically trying to grow in leadership. One of them has to do with teaching, negotiating, or teaching negotiations. I’ve been doing it personally and had success and worked with people individually, but I do feel overwhelmed about exploring this professional development path. I don't really have a leadership mentor to turn to when I'm having questions or concerns or feeling insecure. I have business mentors and things like that, but not someone who specifically thinks about leadership and what that looks like, so that I could...I don't know if that's the answer, but maybe.

Cynthia M Sims: Where's the source of the insecurity coming from.
Dr. Christina Campbell: The insecure thought could be, I guess, Who am I to take up the space in this area? That would be one of the insecure things.

Cynthia M Sims: What are your thoughts to that?
Dr. Racheida Lewis (she/her): So there's part of me that wants to answer like—you said, who am I to take up space, and, excuse my language, but I'll try to keep it PG because it's recording, but like, you're that chick. And then, on the other hand, I totally empathize. It very much reminds me of this—how you can give advice to other people, but then when it comes to yourself it's so hard to take it. Her saying that, I'm just like, what do you mean, you can't take up space? You were tapped for this reason. God chose you for this reason. You wouldn't be here if you weren't meant to be here for that reason. Do I believe that all the time? No, but I should take my own advice. So that's how I feel about that statement: we all deserve to be in the spaces that we have entered into, because we wouldn't be here if we weren't supposed to be. But I totally understand this idea of, Who, me?

Cynthia M Sims: No, Christine, it does so. So based on pipette. So does your vulnerability come from your social identities. Are they connected.
Dr. Christina Campbell: I think so. Because I find that this idea of you can't make a mistake, or there's no grace given. There is... I feel like we are so much more gracious to white individuals, and especially white men. Because the reality is they can make mistakes sometimes. And it—it's true: we should be able to make those same mistakes, too. The repercussions seem to be so different. So it can create a strong sense of vulnerability, because there's the saying like, "it's okay if they do it, it's a problem if I do it." And I'm mixing up the quote, but it's this idea that we live in a society of double standards. If I do something wrong, there's less optimism around what happened, and there's less benefit of the doubt that's given. And so I think it does create a tension of vulnerability.

Cynthia M Sims: If you have questions, Christina, do we ask in the session or post to a board, or you can ask me, so feel free to ask me.
Dr. Christina Campbell: I had a philosophical question about leadership—is it that, do you believe that everyone is a leader, or is it—like, do you believe people are called to leadership, or everyone's a leader of certain things or leadership?
Cynthia M Sims: Why don't we talk about that afterwards? If you can stay? Can we talk about that.
Dr. Christina Campbell: Oh, yeah.
Dr. Christina Campbell: Yes.
Cynthia M Sims: Have that conversation with you.
Cynthia M Sims: And yes, I do have a viewpoint. Okay, okay.

Cynthia M Sims: So just session wrap up. So respond to one statement, something I learned today, a bright spot, a disappointment. Next I will, and we will wrap up. So what? Let's just wrap up today. So and feel free to verbalize. But it's 11:01. I want like to be a woman of my word and get you out of here. But something. One statement so what was something you learned today? A bright spot, a disappointment. Next I will. So just one reflection.

Pipiet Larasatie: For me, it's more about like I'm—I'm glad that I have this space. Although it's only like an hour per week to share my thought about the intersectionality of my social identity and my leadership experience. So I'm glad that I have this space. So that's—that's from me.

Dr. Christina Campbell: Yeah, put in my notes, just even if leading—leading from behind is so leadership. And I'm modeling leadership all the time. I guess I always thought because I was in the background I was not being a leader, and so I put that as one of the points to take away.

Dr. Racheida Lewis (she/her): I put my thoughts in the chat. But I didn't get to the part where essentially, I don't think anything needs to change right now, like everything's been good. But yeah, grateful for this space and the opportunity to like kind of take a moment and pause and reflect, and think about everything within the grand scheme of life, instead of where I am right now.