Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): So, for instance, for me last semester, I just block off my Mondays, and my Monday was my corporate engagement. So I was making sure that I was making calls or sending emails, following up with items, so that way I don't deviate. And I block it so that way, people, if a student or anyone wants to meet up, it's blocked off. It's like focus time for doing this.
 
Cynthia M Sims: Exactly, exactly. So, and I did want to show you this. So I would bring that up because the next exercise we're going to do, and the last one we're going to talk about sort of future goals. But I think you'll enjoy this. So if you, I'll show this to you. This is called—so this is in the learning management system, the LMS. And if you go to content, additional resources, let me go ahead and share my screen. So, so if you go to faculty development content and if you scroll down, there's a section—oops, didn't mean to do that—scroll down, there's a section that says additional resources. And then there's this network map. And I was going to introduce it after the session. But given what you just brought up, I would encourage you to do it. This is not something I'm asking you to do, but I have found that people really get value out of this. So this is a developmental network map. And so this is a list of people who help you get your work done, who helps to advance your career, you know. Where do you get personal support? Who's a role model? And with the goal for you then to actually sort of map out your network, and I bring that up to you because, as you think about sort of those next steps for yourself, as people say, you know, who got you here and the network that got you to where you are today will not necessarily be the network that's going to get you to where you want to be. And do you have that network in place? And I just want you to make sure that you're thinking about that in terms of especially, you know, who are the people in your network that are going to help really advance your career? Who are those people so that you can make sure that you are able to see that? And so there's a diagram sort of looks like a spider. And I don't see it here, but I'll find that and put that.
 
Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Yeah, I see it. I download it. It's in page 318. Yeah, but it might be part of the—since you're seeing it on the website, it doesn't quite come out.
 
Cynthia M Sims: Yeah, yeah, exactly. You see it. Okay, yeah, that's what I wanted. This, yeah, is—so I would encourage you to think through that, and then you map it like you said to this, this map? I think you'd enjoy this. But I just want to make sure that in as you look at your map, that you have the support you need to get you where you want to go.
 
Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Yeah, that's true. I mean, I've always been tempted to do like social work. As you see, I get involved in the community and stuff like that. And I really enjoy it. And with my background, as you know, you know that I was highly involved in my church activities. With a lot of counseling and stuff like that, I always feel attracted towards political activities. But being a foreigner, I don't know how potentially I can get into that field. Or if anything, I really enjoy my position in the university.
 
Cynthia M Sims: Well, you know, there's lots of opportunities if you want to go that political route. And there are definitely people who can help you with that. So I would just become politically active if that's something that you really want to do. So I bring that up to you and Doris just in terms of, you know, I want you to, when you're thinking about sort of next steps and where you want to go, making sure that you have the support, and that you're building those connections. And I'm sure, locally, things like school board, or trying things out like being on the Faculty Senate at UGA, or becoming active politically. And, you know, I don't know, I think you're in Athens, but, you know, in your communities. Those are where people typically start, or you could be part of a political action organization. So they're always looking for candidates. But I just want to bring that up that you position yourself because you're very busy, and it looks like you're very engaged, and you're very balanced, and you know, so you can give me tips. How do you do all that? I don't know. Do you sleep.
 
Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Yeah.
 
Cynthia M Sims: But I really like that. But I also want to make sure that we're setting you up for the future, you know, so that you don't look up, and it's like, "Why am I still in the same place when that's not where I wanted to be?" Now, some people say, you know, "Hey, I'm very much consistent with where I want to be right now." So with that, let me get to the next part of this. So let's see. So we did this. And Doris, you know, if you get a chance to do your Venn diagram and you'd like to talk to me about it, we can do that. I'm gonna go back to share. I want to talk about the next session, the next activity that's coming up. And this is where we're really gonna pull it all together. So next week's assignment is our last assignment. And so you're going to work on the timeline. And so really, you're going to draw a leadership timeline. And, you know, it doesn't have to be your earliest memories, but it does need to be, you know, given where you are. Now you're going to be looking sort of back on your life and think about what are the key milestones or critical incidents in your leadership journey. So you're going to highlight events that taught you about leadership, noting age, maybe a brief description of the event. And think of this timeline, the one on the last is past. And essentially you're going to just map it, you know, like you would put hash marks. And you know, you could have, you know, high school or college or graduate school, or, you know, first job, second job, whatever those timelines are, what were some of those critical incidents? And, you know, map maybe four to six, something like that. So it could be an example of leadership from someone else. Maybe it could be a parent. People talk about their families, a coach, even a peer. Sometimes I get into again their families. You know. I was always the big brother or sister. You know. You can talk about leadership in work as well as non-work domains. Time where you first learned firsthand what it means to lead—a lot of times people talk about their athletic experiences. Being a member of a team, you know, sports. If you are on track or soccer, or sometimes people talk about, maybe it was a book that they read, a film, maybe it was a current event. It could be a course you took, leadership theories, or research you've been engaged, whatever it is. So map that on the timeline. And I would try and stay less than seven, because otherwise it's going to get really difficult to map. So just think about sort of those critical ones. And then the other thing you're also going to do is you're going to map your future. So the second page, think about yourself in the future. What are the possible events you can envision happening that will influence you as a leader and how your leader identity will evolve. You can pick a future time frame as you see fit, you know, but a lot of times people think maybe twenty years. Sometimes that's difficult for people. But I like to think of it as, you know, maybe you're at your retirement party, or you're at some, you know, event where people are recognizing you. What are those things that they have recognized you for? What's on—not necessarily your bucket list, but when you're looking back on your life, what is it that you want to see there? So these could be things like, you know, do you have an anticipated or desired promotion? You know, maybe milestones from your immediate family that might impact your leadership. Children moving out of the house, retirement, completion of a degree or certification, an anticipated trip, something life changing, maybe a desired job change, you know. So your leadership goals. So I want you to think about and map your future. What is it that you'd like to see? What are some of those key milestones? And then last, but not least, you know, describe those. So you can write them as a paper. You can note those, you know, as you describe your timeline, but really just sort of lay it all out. You know where you've been, where you're going from a leadership perspective, you know, and use this timeline. Again, I would try and keep them to maybe five or seven for each one, past and future. And think about where it is that you're going. Questions.
 
Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Good, so we can.
 
Cynthia M Sims: Go ahead!
 
Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Yeah, sorry. I just want to say that we can see all these leadership timelines within the domains, right? So I think it really ties in with this week's activity. Yeah, I want to become a professional tango dancer. To be in that domain, right.
 
Cynthia M Sims: I love it. All right. So Doris just shared that she has posted hers. Doris, can you take control and sort of show yours, or do you want me to do that.
 
Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): I guess it's in Elc. So we can see it there. Maybe.
 
Cynthia M Sims: Yeah, so let's see here. Okay, she can't talk so we can at least view it, so I'll go in and look at discussions. Alright. So I'll go ahead and share, and I know you can't talk. Hmm.

Cynthia M Sims: Alright, so hard to believe this is week 4. So we just have one more session to go. And so we're going to really speak about domain circles. So that's what we're going to be focusing on. And so we've done our 3 word check in so tired times 3. And growth worried about that. This is a quote by Ronald Hyphas, and he's known for adaptive leadership. He's 1 of the drivers principals in the field, and so I love this quote, and he says, the adaptive demands of our societies require leadership that takes responsibility. Without waiting for revelation or request. One may lead, perhaps with not more than a question in hand. So that's part of the adaptive leadership, philosophy, or framework. So good things to remember. Sort of housekeeping. So what we did last week was we focused on. I am statements this time. I'm going to talk a little bit about leadership identity construction. Thank you for completing the clin cards. If you have it, please do so. I think we're missing one person. I think if you're uga faculty, if you have a visa clin card. Please let me know, and we'll just refill it. But if not, we're in the process of getting that going. So so that's the visa clin cards, and then I'd like to set up individual meetings with you sort of in the program debrief. And we have this as a Google Doc. And I will put this Google Doc for the sign up in the chat. So you can go ahead and do that, and I'll share it at the end also. So want to just bring that up. In terms of leadership development, just some background. So really, when we start thinking about leadership identity, we're looking at a model that has 4 components. And so one of those components is purpose and calling. So why do I do what I do? The other is, what's my impact on the world. So again, that's really getting into purpose and calling. And then the self identity or this role self role leader identity. So who am I so getting into those aspects? Social identity is really what personal characteristics are important to me. And this also fuels. Where do I lead? So where does my leadership actually get enacted? And then last, is relationship identity, which is really the more social aspect, whereas who encourages my development? So those are really the major constructs that we've been working with throughout this program, and we'll be wrapping up sort of pulling that all together. Okay, any questions on that. So we're continuing with mentoring as a holding environment. We've talked about containment making sure we have a safe space. We've talked about empathetic acknowledgement. What does empathy look like? How to validate that, how to attend to one another, and then sort of that enabling perspective, that sense, making providing calm support for one another. And so really, what group Thursday Group decided to do was, these are your ground rules, and I'm not gonna go through them. But essentially, this is what you've agreed to. And then what we're going to really spend our time today is talking about domain circles. So, Doris, let me know if this is something you'll be able to share or not. And so the domain circles were really pretty straightforward. You've got to create a Venn diagram of your leadership identity, and then just show you know, how does that relate to other domains in your life? Yeah, those domains might look like the ones here they could be expanded. I've seen people do that. Okay, thanks, Doris. So, Doris. So let's just go through those, and then we'll we'll talk about them. So things that included in your work, like community and friends, or your practice of leadership or synergizing. So we'll we'll talk through some of these questions. I'm going to stop sharing and Jorray, I think you're up. Yes, please. Hmm.

Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): No questions. For sharing my circles. Okay, so let's start from the beginning. So on this section about identifying the domains. I put their leadership id first, st I guess. And I did this after the fact. That's why it's a 0, because I figured out like, Oh, that should be like a bigger circle. Then I put I separate because I was thinking, like my colleagues, right and and administration and whatnot I mean I he got me even thinking on the question about how big, right? The size and I know you share a document where we can reflect on, on, who help us on create our leadership and whatnot. I think it would be nice to reflect like, who do I interact the most? And then like how they they affect my leadership. Right? Or how can I? Yeah. So I I just put like a random number. I think, like 25 is the people that I interact. The most. And then, of course, the students, I think, in my classes that's this is per year. I'm also part of the Hoa board in my neighborhood. So we're 4 members. But there's other helpers. So I just I mean, even on this, I just put 6. But I think like that's more or less the people that is highly engaged. And then the bigger group is the whole neighbors. We're 150 homes. I mean, I just put 2 50. But in reality it's like they they. the couple and the kids and while I don't interact directly with everyone, my leadership in the board is affecting these houses or these members of the community. then, I went on, friends and I figured out that most of my friends are like running friends. So that's why I put a slash running and and and this is the closest group of friends that I have. And I think we're like between couples and kids. It's like 15 or or more people. As I mentioned, I didn't even figure out the actual size. It will be cool, like I'm planning to put more time into this and actually list the people and then like, how am I helping them right in a personal relationship? On top of those close friends I have. I'm part of a club, a running club. and that's another. Some of these there's overlap, and that's when I was doing the circle. I guess that's why I started overlapping, and I guess, as you can imagine, like, since these are related to my neighbors, they're also overlap, so I guess I did a natural overlap from the beginning. On Sundays I go and play soccer whenever I can. They're not like my true, close friends, right? But I mean, I interact with this group of people. So I just put it as as a domain. and then tango, we, my wife and I. We go, and to a dance club tango. I mean they mostly it's 15 people, but I think whenever we do milongas and stuff it. It grows so it's bigger. I'm definitely not the leader there. I'm just a participant. So I think it helped me understand. Yeah, it's domains. I'm part of the leadership in some domains. I'm half and stuff like that right? And then my family, and and then I just put my family like my family of 3. But I guess I was thinking also that we I can potentially expand it. And I guess whenever I did the list. I think I put family first, st but I think somehow I got started here and and then I forgot. So I just put them back and then I didn't even put like my extended family right? That I, as I mentioned, is is pretty. It's pretty big. If I count cousins, relatives probably like we can go in the 150 people or or more. but maybe I can do like the family, and then extend it, and then over. Extend it. That will be more overlaps right So so those were the domains that I did. As you see, I put numbers on it. I started doing circles the same size. Then, based on the number of people I I just did the students and the hoa neighbors bigger. And then I make my family like smaller, because it's a small. and then the rest. I just kept kept them the same size. And as you can see, so the leadership I just put it on black one and 2 I guess the students I I put it really close to my leadership identity. Because I think as as an instructor, I am leading their educational experience in the classroom. So I think that's why, I put it really close to their leadership identity with my colleagues, as you saw. As you see, there's an overlap with the students, and then there's an overlap with the with the identity. I'm not a leader of my colleagues, right? I lead some of the activities and stuff like that on research and in in the program itself. So that's why you see, the the overlap that I put with the leadership is a little bit smaller. So I'm kind of like a participant of my colleagues. But then I also lead some of the activities right? So it it has an overlap with the overarching 0. Then moving into the neighbors. So I did 3 and 4, also overlapping. And I guess I overlap it also with my family, because my family is part of the neighbors. Right? You see, on the 4 I put. I put the 4 similarly to 2. I lead my neighbors by being the treasurer of the Hoa. I'm the ones sending communications and making sure that we spend the money correctly and stuff like that. I think, on 3. And being part of the board, that's like I'm using all my leadership, identity or skills completely. Right? That's being part of the board, I mean, is, I mean, people vote for us and stuff like that. So that's a leadership position. So that's why I put it like completely in. And the same thing with my family, right? Even even I'm not an elected official with my family. I think. Function as a leader of my family. Right? This is co-shared with my wife, of course. But yeah, I just put it completely in that I need. And and I overlap these 3 right? That's we're part of the neighborhood and stuff like that. I guess we could also overlap it with my friends, because my family also kind of with my friends. So maybe potentially, we can put it some somewhere here. That makes sense. Yeah, and maybe more with 5 than with 6. So 5 m. 6 is the related to running right? So some of my close friends that are also part of the club. And and then we do a lot of races together. All the physical activities we do together. And then even we do gatherings. So we while we do a lot of running, we don't. It's not the only thing we do right. And I will say that I have some leadership identity with them on. But I'm not the leader, right? So I'm just like their friends. So that way it kind of put them halfway in and out from the leadership identity. On the soccer. I also put them kind of halfway in and out. They're a little bit more separated from the other circles because these groups or the people that I interact here, they don't overlap with other circles. I put it halfway with the leadership. Because I even though I'm just a participant, I do take a role of leadership on on guiding some of the players. I mean, I'm not like. I'm super good at soccer, but I'm good at tactics, and I can figure out like, Oh, I can guide, and I can coach some of the of the participants. And I think that's why I put it a little bit like overlap. I mean, if I were to say like, Oh, I just go, and I'm super quiet. Then I would put it out. But I think I've been, and I like it right. I like that, Lee, that. I think tango tango. I had it completely out, I think. but it move a little bit, because I don't think there, I'm just participating. I'm not guiding anyone. I just go and lead myself. I guess maybe if anything, I can just put like very little overlap with the leadership, because I'm leading myself as a dancer. I lead whoever I'm dancing with. But beyond that I mean the the instructor, the the dance teacher. She's the one that takes leadership on. What are we gonna do? I don't have to do any prep or anything. I just show up and and enjoy right. So and I guess family, I already explained. I put it completely in with the leadership identity. And I think what I've been discussing kind of entails some of these questions right like, where do I practice in these groups? I was thinking and writing about that. But I think, as you discuss where I put the circles. It implies a lot of these questions, right? As you can see, there's some some independence or some circles are integrated. Some are completely independent. Right? very few, I guess. Just 3, the 4 and the 9. I complete them. Put them inside the the leadership identity. The rest. I just put them like half and half, or something like that. Any questions, or.

Cynthia M Sims: Yeah, this this is fabulous. You spent a lot of time working through and thinking through and representing it. So Doris says it looks good so so there's you've done a great job of, I think, walking through explaining it, thinking through Doris's thanks for walking us through your thoughts. So It seems like you don't have any domains that conflict with one another. So. But and it's definitely you've got a lot of synergy going on in terms of how you practice your leadership. So is what we're seeing here. Is this what you want it to be so. What you're doing is you depicted where you are. So now that you've got this on the map, you know. Is this, where is this what you'd like it to be? Or are you okay with what it is? And you wouldn't make any changes to it. What are your thoughts around that.

Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): I mean, that's I guess from the professional perspective. I mean i i i would like like and like you mentioned right. I would like to have like a leadership position within the university. That is like I mean, I I do have the opportunity to lead right. But I I guess that would be a natural like mission to accomplish your goal. But besides that, I mean even like sometimes I think oh, maybe I should quit from the hoa board. It's it's too much work. Yeah. So on the opposite side, like, sometimes I think like, Oh, maybe I should like reduce my plate, and, as you know, as as we age like, I mean, we, we should focus on what matter? The most right? And I think family definitely is always like in the center right front and center. But I think the professional domain is is important. Right? I think now that you were saying about that I was thinking about like, if the leadership identities this this size like, how am I doing like 50% into my university work? Related stuff? Like, how how am I spreading myself out? And then how can I grow in some areas. Right? Yeah. So I think definitely, I mean, I I enjoy. How is it is? I mean, I'm in different domains. And I think with my personality, I enjoy being in many things. I think I think that's 1 of the reasons why I'm in academia and I always kind of like I I love that we have so many hats. I'm the instructor. I'm the researcher. I'm the counselor. I'm the coach. I'm the supervisor. I'm the grader. So I don't get bored right. I'm not one person that they say. Oh, I just want to be the guy on finance and. Give me the spreadsheets, and that's it. I mean, even like in my Hoa, I'm the finance guy and that I'm not the finance guys in the in the university. Right? So I I think that I enjoy it. but I think the natural would be like to grow more on the leadership positions at the University, and maybe considering decreasing some of my other leadership roles in other stuff.

Cynthia M Sims: Okay. Alright. Well, this like I said, very comprehensive, well thought out. Did a great job of explaining how you enact your leadership through all of these. And I thought your approach to this in terms of you seem to. The size seems to be somewhat correlated with your with number of people. so it's interesting. And a lot of times what some of your some of the people in the other sections did was really more in terms of the not necessarily number of people, but the amount of time or focus that they had. So so, for example, their family domains tended to be larger because they spend a lot of their time with their families, for example. So but I think this is very clear so one of the things I would ask you to also think about with yours is I see very much, you know you very much embedded in the community and your support there, and you're very active. You've got your university colleagues but in terms of sort of I don't see anything here around sort of your professional networking, you know. So how? Where is that represented?

Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Yeah, be beyond. Yeah, I guess it would be represented somewhere here. Right? But you're right. Pay them. Yeah. Professional connections. And I guess part of my role is even not just university students, university colleagues, but also university like companies. Because that's that's kind of half my job connect with companies. So you're right. Maybe like industry connections or something like that. And then definitely like I mean colleagues. I can do like partners because I do have partners like in Mexico, in some other places and other institutions, but I guess I would have put them here. Yeah, and I think it will be worth like even quantifying. And yes, size is something. But you're right. The time might be the other way to go about it. Like like. For instance, my appointment. Half my time is corporate engagement to do this team-based projects. And half is teaching right. And, for instance, and the problem with corporate engagement is that if you don't put it on your schedule, it can so easily sway away. So because, you know, teaching, and I've seen it in my experience. I don't know. What have you teaching is like a bottomless hole. You can spend 60 h and and and you can do more. You can spend 70 h per week, and you can always do more so, and and like like this, like it was discussed in this group. Right like time, is the of the essence, and time is the currency right of leadership and and time. So even like if we say, Oh, we, we have to lead others. Then how much time are you putting into these practices?

Cynthia M Sims: So what you have is your leadership, and you've mapped them. So you've got family and friends. You've got work, professional network and community. And so essentially what you're saying as I'm looking at this is that you exercise leadership both in your family, your work, professions, and your community. And the way that it's listed here is, there's not a whole lot of overlap between them, meaning that your families and your family and friends are not necessarily interacting with your work and professional or your community. Each one is distinct and separate. So that's what I would take from this. And I know you can't talk. I'm just trying to get chat back up. Oh, there it is. Okay, alright, and but you're active. Okay, thank you. I'm reading it correctly. all right. And so and your circles. And I know you. You did this quickly. They're pretty much the same size. So was that intentional. I think community might be a little bigger. I think that's the coloring. So they're sort of equal presence in your life. Would that be accurate? Okay, alright. All right. Anything you'd like to share about what Doris has listed here. Observations.

Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): I noticed from. I mean, I didn't pay attention to the other people what other people share. And yeah, I can see that a little bit more lean with what it was offer. Yeah. But I think it's yes, yeah. I mean, it tells the point right.

Cynthia M Sims: Yeah. so at work and at home. She's saying, that, she spends her leadership there and her family's not here in the Us. so I know that's gotta be, you know, difficult to lead in those contexts, especially if you're not there. so. And you're you're keeping things pretty much separate And that seems to be a a preference for that. I would say the same thing that we talked about. is, I see, work and professional network. In terms of making sure that as you think about your future goals, you know, do you? What type of network do you need to get you where you want to go? I would say, that's something you need to think about. In. Do you have the network to do that? yeah, it's it's tough not having family here and those sort of communal resources. So your church community is probably you know, is the substitute for that, and so they. They may therefore become a bigger part of your life. Would that be true? Okay. Alright. Well, I appreciate that. You're able to join us, and chime in in the in the chat. Let's see and so when you keep things them separate, are you keeping these domains separate intentionally? So you don't like mixing your domains? Or is it that you just don't have? So I just want to know, are keeping these domains separate, intentional or just. It's just happened that way. Is that so? I just want to know is that your preference, Doris, to keep the domain separate from one another? Okay, okay. alright. And then the last question is, if you were to have sort of an ideal domain. But I like that. My work and family do not overlap. Okay, thank you for sharing that. Okay, and ideally, you know what might. This is this your ideal? So this is what your experience is today. Is there something that you'd like to see done differently? If you could to increase this or change this. I would like the orange domains to overlap. So you'd like to see your community and friends overlap. Okay? Good. great! Well, thank you so much for sharing that that sounds great. And sorry you're not able to voice, but we appreciate you. alright. So So with that, we'll just keep going, and we'll close out. So let me go back to. I'll put this over here. My controls. Okay? So conclusion. So we're coming to the end of the program. So if you can, you're going to need to complete a survey, so I'll release the survey for next week. So if you would then complete the survey, sign up for the one on one debrief, and then we will email you a visa clin card. Hopefully, I can get all of that done and get that going. it's it's started. I just need to make sure everybody signed off. So just we can do a session wrap up so you can respond to one statement. You know something I learned today. A bright spot, a disappointment. Next I will. So let's just wrap up so I'll stop sharing.

Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Yeah, I guess my my take home is the term. the time domain, or the time management, I mean, that's something that last year. I I've been putting a lot of emphasis on like, for instance, what I mentioned about blocking a day on a specific activity. And even the same thing with teaching right? Because, unfortunately, like being bottomless. making sure that we just give the right amount of time on on prepping and assessing and grading, sometimes grading. We just want to do it in 1 h, but it takes a full half day but just make making sure that but I mean that is is something that aligns with what he's getting right. So I would take that discussion about the time and not just making it about the size. I don't have any complaints. I I figured out that I also miss my church domain. I didn't quite put it and I also miss my family from Mexico, which is kind of far away. But yeah, I can technically do different domains with it, or subdomains within the family.

Cynthia M Sims: Okay, exactly, you know, as you interact with other people's domains and discussions, it can definitely grow. So. But you, you were very comprehensive. So one of the one of the more comprehensive maps that we've had, so others did more of a description so good. Alright, and then Doris says I enjoyed learning about domain circles and thinking about what I would like to see in the future. Good! And, Doris, I know you said you won't be able to join next week, and I understand that. So because of a prior commitment, so if you would sign up for the final debrief, and then maybe at that time we can go through yours. So it looks like it'll just be you and me next week. okay, alright. Well, thanks. One and all, and I'll see you next week.

Jorge I Rodriguez, PhD (UGA): Thank you.

Cynthia M Sims: Okay.