TranscriptJune 2, 2025, 3:01PMZeping Liu started transcriptionZeping Liu   0:06Yeah. So.So so does the current stage for this project is still like the? I'm still trying to design the prototype of this system so, but before I design the the the workflow of this system, I need to collect the data. So data in this system is like the as.Making process is the as per solution or the knowledge. So I need to convert this kind of knowledge to data.Like the AI system color.So This is why I need to invite you to take to participate in this interview is like the primary goal.Goal is to understand your decision making process when you are working on a special problem.So what?What I'm interested is about how you think through the analysis the like given a problem, the interactive steps you take.The choices you make, like the attributes you you will use to do special clustering.The always Admiral to choose and also how to set the parameters of the algorithms and the more importantly for me for us is like how?Why you choose this massive?Why you choose this attribute? In other words, is that the reason you add the rationale behind those choices.So there is no right or wrong answer there.Everything is.I mean, everything is reasonable.So the the only things I have to.Try to.Tell us what you about your knowledge, why you choose it.The reasoning process and the other decision making process and this so today's conversation will include two parts.The first is like some general questions for you about your background, your experience in working on some real world problems, and secondly, the second part is, is that I will present you with a scenario with.With a.With a with a scenario with the data and you you using this data you can use RCS Pro to do some analysis.And what I do is I to record your solution your, your workflow and maybe I will.Problem some question for you to for you to think about how why you choose this method OK.So yeah, so I will start with some general questions.Alberto Nieto   2:37Sounds good.Zeping Liu   2:38Yeah. OK.Thank you.Yeah. So I will talk.So could you please briefly tell me about your experience in spatial analysis, particularly with spatial clustering? Like for example how long?How long have you been working in this field?What type of cluster, method, data size and application domains is is your primary focus?Alberto Nieto   3:03Yeah, I've been at GIS professional since 2009.So I've been a GIS professional for about 15 years.And.I started my involvement with spatial clustering and spatial analysis that would benefit from clustering.I don't think started probably until about 20.16.Or so when I started working for Capital One.Were they actively use clustering algorithms to try to identify potential sites for bank branches?And that was fundamental to their analysis.That was the start point of even knowing where to look at, so that was very important in that case.I then learned more about spatial statistics workflows to do that.Zeping Liu   4:02And.Alberto Nieto   4:02Capital One had their own proprietary clustering ways to identify sites. We learned about spatial statistics tools there.Zeping Liu   4:05Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   4:11And I became acquainted with the broader spatial statistics side of things around that time, around 2016 or so.So I've been doing, I would say outside of I did applied clustering analysis for 2016 through 2018.And then I joined Asri and became more of a.Zeping Liu   4:31Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   4:32Advocate for the software and then eventually a product engineer for the software.Zeping Liu   4:36Oh cool.Alberto Nieto   4:39Does that give you enough information to start for for that background? OK, OK.Zeping Liu   4:42Yeah, yeah, that's that's good.Ankita Bakshi   4:43I do have one more question just for out of curiosity.Alberto Nieto   4:45Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   4:47How did you learn clustering?Is it like on the job like you had Capital One proprietary, so you learned that and then you started learning spatial stats through the resources and just the way like we we provide information in our documentation and workshops, is that how you learn clustering?Alberto Nieto   5:09Yeah, I would say I learned it in maybe 3.Groups like 3 Waves like the first wave was through college right through geography courses and learning a little bit about the fundamental parts of clustering.But not like applied at all.It was all class work and learning through classes and I did learn about hotspot analysis and core pleth mapping through college essentially.Zeping Liu   5:30Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   5:37But that wasn't applied, so it didn't really stick.It didn't.It wasn't something that I actively did until I went to Capital One.And there they had a bunch of data scientists and GIS professionals already working on these problems.So they had, like they had proprietary ways to do this analysis, and those preparatory ways they taught to new staff coming on and stuff that would take those and continue improving them.So the bulk of what I learned about clustering, especially the applied part of it that I think is the most important, was through Capital one's own data scientists that did that work.That thought about past cases of success, past cases of failure, and what kind of clustering let them to to decide those or to find similar places like that.Then I learn about azri spatial stats.That's the third wave I would say of what I learned about clustering.And with that comes everything that we do in our tools today.Zeping Liu   6:49Sure. Thank you.Thank you very much.Alberto Nieto   6:51Yeah, no problem.Zeping Liu   6:52And yeah, and the the second question is about a little bit more specifically is like.So during imprecise all your technical sets think about the basical knowledge required for special clustering.What kind of skills and the theory like?The statistical concept like distribution, hypothesis testing, all spatial principles like spatial autocorrelation.The the scale that this kind of thing, which kind of like the the the scale theory using are most important in doing spatial clustering.Alberto Nieto   7:31Which theoretical skills are most important in doing spatial clustering? Yeah.Zeping Liu   7:35Yeah.Just. Yeah, just like some.You know my some, some kind of statistical concepts, special principles, like all all some mathematical domains using not most important, just important for like to do the spatial clustering.Alberto Nieto   7:56Yeah, that's interesting.I'm pausing for a second because I have like 2 competing.Schools of thought, I think.And I'll just put those out there.I feel like that might help.Either way, I hope.One school of thought is that.The domain problem is the most important thing over any statistical skill set.For example, understanding that.A bank in my case needed certain qualities.For example, to be in proximity to.High density of retail stores, high density of traffic, things like that, that are not obviously statistical fundamental skills, but they are very much domain skills.So I think that generally is the most important thing. The domain understanding of what characterizes a desirable cluster, and that goes beyond spatial autocorrelation that goes beyond.Any type of distribution assessment or maybe I wouldn't say goes beyond.I would say it's like underpinning. Everything should be built on that domain knowledge, right?Then from there you start to bring in candidate algorithms or candidate approaches.From the simplest to the most complex.And that's when having a sense of distribution assumptions having a sense of these other things that you mentioned. Zeping helps. Now, which of those is the most important? I struggle to answer that.I don't know is my answer because it depends on.Yeah, I'm trying to think if I can give you a useful answer. And I think the most useful answer is.Is that it depends. Like the underpinning to me is so much more important than the statistical stuff that you build the framework that you build on top of that underpinning, if that makes sense. The way I'm framing it at least.I'll say one more thing there to try to make it helpful.The.The thing that I've found useful about tools like density based clustering.Zeping Liu   10:24Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   10:25Is that it has helped me.Continue to focus on that domain side of things.And the tool I might be going out on a limb by saying this, but the tool handles the statistical verification of things coming back in a sensible way, right?Like I basically can give the tool some parameters to tell me, OK, I need to have 20 stores at least for it to be considered a cluster, I need to for those to have been open within a year.And I can start to frame my decisions for making a cluster that way, and then which of the different statistical requirements or like mathematical backgrounds?I kind of defer to the tool and the makers of the tool to have made solid decisions there.Because I, as a analyst, yeah, I need to have a a solid foundation in mathematics or statistics to some degree.But I need to think more about the domain problem, right?Zeping Liu   11:28Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   11:28And that's hard enough without then having to rebuild a tool from scratch like my goal is not to build a microwave oven. Or my goal is to cook a good dish.Zeping Liu   11:41Hmm.Alberto Nieto   11:42With that microwave oven.Zeping Liu   11:44So based on my understanding, like the domain knowledge like for the each questions, what kind of the the background knowledge required is most important because the tool is not because they are a lot of tools we can use, but which one which tool is suitable for the quest.Alberto Nieto   11:55Yeah.Zeping Liu   12:01Is is more important than the tool itself.Alberto Nieto   12:05I think so, yes.Zeping Liu   12:06Does.OK.Sure. So for the like you, you, you mentioned this kind of domain, the domain knowledge like for example given a questions a problem like maybe test take an example like you, you have never met before. So how do you get this?How do you get this science, science of domain knowledge to solve this problem?Alberto Nieto   12:29Can you repeat the question? I didn't get the very far first part.Zeping Liu   12:30Sorry. Yeah, just for example, when you face a problem that you have never met before is not like a new.Very new question for you, very new for you and maybe sometimes you don't have any like domin knowledge about it like knowledge.Alberto Nieto   12:39Sure.Sure.Zeping Liu   12:45So so how do you get? How do you get this kind of domain knowledge to equip you with?Equip with you to solve this problem.Alberto Nieto   12:56This might not be a satisfactory answer, but it's through human conversations, right?So for example, when I started at Capital One and this was new to me, this idea of site selection through clustering.Zeping Liu   13:05Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   13:10I basically sat in on meetings where these analysts and data scientists were discussing the workflow and through listening to them talk about, here's the sites that this round of analysis detected. And here's the market planners that are gonna go and evaluate those sites. And then two weeks later.Zeping Liu   13:16Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   13:29They receive the results OK.This one was very good.This one was very bad.That's how I started building domain knowledge right through this sort of analog effort.Zeping Liu   13:37Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   13:40Jeff discussing with people and sitting in meetings and hearing feedback that was not.It was data certainly because they record on field applications the survey of like the site is positive.It has the attractive qualities that we want, but it's not.Yeah, it was.It was talking and sitting in meetings and being part of the process that that way.The algorithm itself like how do I acquire the the skills to know how to run that algorithm like that part.I would say.That did depend on like the people that created that algorithm to make good documentation for it.And that was, you know, that differed depending on on the project. Sometimes it was great, sometimes it was very poor.So in that way, like I did, try to read up on those algorithms to whatever documentation was available and that gave me the background on how it how it goes through in a sequence.Zeping Liu   14:41Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   14:44Yeah, I'm hoping that helps.But the domain knowledge part is just conversations is just being part of it.Zeping Liu   14:46Yeah.Yeah. Thank you.Yeah. And the last question in this part is like, so in your opinion in your experiences like how to define a successful or valuable or beautiful spatial clustering analysis results. So like just, I don't know, but I just take some example like so maybe there are some stat.Significance.Or like the visual visual, visual, visual, visual quality is good or like.The the the, the There's some insights behind mine or something that how to define the successful results, yeah.Alberto Nieto   15:30Yeah, interesting question.I'm trying to tie them all to real world examples, right?I'm trying to keep them as close to real world practical applications of clustering as possible as closely as possible.And there's two.There's two that come to mind, the Capital One, which I'll keep using because it was actual real world application of clustering with serious implications for that company.The other one is when I was already at Esri as a solution engineer, we would help transportation agencies with projects where they were looking at systemic Transportation Safety problems and that use clustering for finding intersections where there's too many crashes and things like that, or where there's too.Many fatal or serious accidents and stuff like that.On the first one on Capital One, how do we determine what's a good cluster or a beautiful or a useful cluster?Zeping Liu   16:25Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   16:27I think.That one comes back to what I answered previously, right?So the.Zeping Liu   16:33Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   16:36The burden of proof or the burden of qualifying a cluster is a little bit on the executives that actually are on the chopping block for making good decisions with a lot of money.So there would always be in these projects.Is executive who led the project and.Whose entire reputation and career was on the line. Based on these decisions.So they needed to define what they cared about.They needed to establish up front that this initiative is going to look for, you know.A younger audience that is establishing their first bank.Connections and therefore a good cluster is a well, they wouldn't tell you what's a good cluster, right?It would be up for us, the people running the analysis or things like that to dig that out of them.In an interview very much like this.And we would say, what are some, you know, through a conversation like this, we would ask.What are the ideal characteristics of a branch in your scenario that you're planning for this next three years and they're looking for branches, for example, that serve as billboards that people that walk down the street, see them and get interested in the brand or whatnot?Or they might say we're looking for branches that people go past on their way to the grocery store, and it's very convenient for someone to stop by on their way home, and each initiative had their own priorities.But the key thing there is that what to find a good cluster is those characteristics of the executive deciding that their initiative was gonna focus on that.Zeping Liu   18:26Hmm.Alberto Nieto   18:28And then we connect that to, OK, the cluster that might identify that has these properties and then we qualify that with the executive.I'm hoping that makes sense. The way I've framed it, and then for I mentioned that one, but I definitely want to contrast it with others that are way less focused because that one, I think the benefit of that exercise is that it almost felt like a well oil.Zeping Liu   18:37Yeah.Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   18:50Machine there was an executive creating a project.There was an analytical team and they had years of experience, so it felt very structured.In many cases, and in most cases, I might guess it's not quite that well structured.So the transportation use cases I think are maybe good examples of the more common case where you don't have a great definition to start with.Of what's needed.So the idea there is that you don't know what makes a good cluster up front, right?You don't even know what you're looking for yet, but perhaps you're looking for something in the data.That bubbles up. That raises questions.And to get more specific, the example was with the National Hwy. Transportation Safety Administration nitza they call them.They determine laws for seatbelts.They determine laws for what cars need when they crash.Like how much give the car will have, at least at the US federal level.And they.They had a project where they were basically determining state level funding for.Countermeasures. They call them basically different money that goes into like different St. lights, different like cutting trees in front of stop signs, stuff like that where it might help remediate problematic intersections or problematic pieces of road. And in those cases.Says it was much more difficult to pin down some director to say this is what we're looking for because they didn't know what they're looking for, what they were looking for is for like a clustering. They were looking for an analyst to give them some ideas of where.To even start looking.Zeping Liu   20:34Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   20:34They didn't even say the word clustering, but naturally it went to that.And what they're looking for is systemic problems, places that are not explained away by randomness.Zeping Liu   20:43Mm.Alberto Nieto   20:48But maybe have some structure and some something systemic where you can't, where you can reject that null hypothesis of spatial randomness, right?So in that case, it's more akin to do a data-driven clustering and see what bubbles up and then write down the questions that those clusters raise.And see if those questions are relevant to the team, to the director, and then that way it's far more open-ended, right? It's it's purely exploratory.Zeping Liu   21:09Mm.Mm hmm.Mm hmm.OK.Thank you.And just a little bit specific like.If we want to use.Some, some, some metrics or some some way to quantify this kind of evaluation process?So what kind of metrics or what kind of way you use to quantify these kind of results?I'll take an example like.For example, for each questions, the number of clusters we we get is different.So how do these define?I mean, during your experience, how to define this kind of number?Like how many number of cluster we want.So just take example also.So what kind of quantify that you use to to evaluate the results?Alberto Nieto   22:10Hmm.What kind of metric helps me evaluate the results?That's interesting.I'm gonna keep leaning on real world cases and try to see if if some metrics were useful there.So OK, like the Capital One example.Zeping Liu   22:35Hmm.Alberto Nieto   22:36That one felt easier because it was more structured.But there were key criteria that we were looking for, right?So let's say for one initiative and one project of three years, they were looking for.Zeping Liu   22:43Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   22:51High density of kind of more expensive retail, let's say, like Apple stores.Zeping Liu   22:55Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   22:58And kind of high end clothing stores.They're clusters that came back needed to report on the properties of the cluster.Given those criteria that were established up front, right?So those were useful criteria because then we could see, OK.We know that Lea, the director or the executive for this initiative, really cares about this high end clientele.So every cluster that we produce and analyse needs to tell us what's the density of.Zeping Liu   23:32Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   23:32High, high expense retail.And those aren't, you know, advanced diagnostics. They're very simple.It's literally just counting within the search distance. What was the.Zeping Liu   23:39Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   23:44What was the amount of high quality retail and also by that measure, what's the amount of the other types of retail that were less desirable for that purpose?Because.There were interesting clusters where you had only high density, only high end retail. There were other clusters that we have high end retail but also low end retail and high densities of both. And there were things that needed to be differentiated between the two.Zeping Liu   24:03Mm H.Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   24:12But my point with all that is that, like the diagnostics weren't that advanced.They were just counts of the properties of the cluster that would help us understand and distinguish between.Zeping Liu   24:17Mm H.Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   24:24Candidate clusters.In that case it was very simple because it's driven by these properties that were pre established for what's a good cluster. For the other one, let's say the transportation case.That one is tougher, right?Because it's all data-driven.You're just exploring the data, seeing what bubbles up, and there's some key things that I want to do as soon as I get a cluster back. For example with a density based clustering output, I want to zoom into that intersection and see visually what is the shape of.This cluster, are they all next to a gas station?With no street light right in front of it, there are four people in a straight line are not slowing down.It's very visual.It's very context driven.It's very much about what's near this cluster.Zeping Liu   25:07Mm H.Alberto Nieto   25:10Less than.You know some distribution diagnostic that might tell me, OK, this you know this.Zeping Liu   25:15Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   25:19This has the statistical properties. I think those are useful, maybe to even meet the criteria of.Here's a cluster or no, but once it gets back to the analyst to like the domain person that is meant to make sure this passes real work criteria, the diagnostics become so much more about the domain.Again, it's so much about the domain.Zeping Liu   25:39Yeah.Alberto Nieto   25:41And we're last thing I'll say and I don't know if this helps you.Zeping Liu   25:41OK.Alberto Nieto   25:44We're struggling mightily with this with the aggregation tool because there's all these diagnostics that you can get for what's the appropriate aggregation size, and those might help, right?Those might be good context to have, but at the end of the day, there's a lot of context that comes with what are you gonna do with those results.And that's not a that's so much more driven by domain.That's a much more driven by how do you communicate this information to someone in a way that makes sense?Not so much driven by a statistical output by a mathematical output.Zeping Liu   26:18OK.So Oh yeah, thank you.And you just mentioned the aggation.I don't understand.It's what is aggregation. I mean, yeah.Alberto Nieto   26:26Yes. So the idea that you have for example.Point data observations that are recorded in terms of a single point in space.Zeping Liu   26:33Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   26:37And these observations, let's say that you've collected survey results for several thousand observations. Let's say sightings of a species and a National Park.Zeping Liu   26:43Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   26:49You can work with the individual point data, right?And you can make a map of the individual point data.But very soon you're gonna wanna. Perhaps.Make a summary of this point data and that summary might be a grid where you count how many points there are in each cell in that grid.Zeping Liu   27:06OK.Alberto Nieto   27:07Or you may wanna aggregate to some administrative boundary.Let's say how many crime points were there in this neighborhood?Zeping Liu   27:10Mm.Alberto Nieto   27:14Because the remediation might happen at the neighborhood level or at the police district level.Zeping Liu   27:14Mm hmm.Alberto Nieto   27:19Rather than the individual dis like point.That's what I mean by aggregation. That you're summarizing incidents into polygonal areas.Zeping Liu   27:24OK.Yeah.So it's more like the the scale the, the, the.Analyze unit right? It's like.Alberto Nieto   27:37Yeah, exactly.It gets into analysis unit for sure, yeah.Zeping Liu   27:38Yeah.OK.Sure. Thank you pretty much. And yeah, we are go to the second part is about I will present you with the scenario and also this scenario is also along with the data.Alberto Nieto   27:43Yeah, yeah, of course.OK.Zeping Liu   27:51So you can use RGS Pro to explore data.Just just is a very open-ended questions and you can just just do what you want just assuming like you are you have the data you just exploit and yeah I will I will share my screen and.Alberto Nieto   27:54Cool.OK.Ankita Bakshi   28:05Zip zipping before we go to that part actually.Like this interview is great because Alberto has gone through that process of like, OK, people like the the transportation example. Like if we can use that as like A use case here first before we go on to the second one to just get more information on how.You like? Think about it. When someone comes to you like the same example and it's good because you've done that.So we wanna capture the things that you have worked on in that example.Which is great.So let let's probably like start a little bit with your example. Alberto, where? OK, so you had this this customer come in and ask you like we have this data like of collision and we want to increase safety like what were some of the like conversations and steps?Zeping Liu   28:44Mm hmm.OK.Ankita Bakshi   29:01And like your directions, like, what did you explore?What worked?What did not work?What information you needed from them in order to like?Kind of proceed in general directions. I think if you, I mean you've pretty much like in different pieces talked a little bit about it, but like what that entire conversation or process looks like, it's really valuable for us to like capture because then we can train the, the.Zeping Liu   29:26Mm hmm.Ankita Bakshi   29:27Model for that kind of interaction.Alberto Nieto   29:30Yeah, yeah. I think the transportation use case theorizing that there's this AI assistant helping that engagement, that that's a good example. I think you're right.OK. So let me see if I can try to organize it.Because there was a series of meetings, it was over a a long project, but I'll try to keep it short and concise.It's notable to say that the first thing we did for the NITZA for National Hwy. Transportation Safety Administration was just a general High Level workshop on spatial stats.It wasn't even that they came to us and said we need help with this problem.It was more that there was a GIS day spatial statistics presentation where we showed these different tools.And then one of their analysts, after seeing one of the tools presented, they saw density based clustering being presented.They came to us and said I think I have some ideas over some stuff we wanna try to do.So that kick started the conversations, right?They saw it shown.They didn't know it existed before that, and now that they knew they wanted to ask us for more thoughts on that and.The other part was Nitza already.Has things in place to try to find.Systematic problems in across the country.So what was missing?What prompt started this?Is that those systems are kind of.Yeah. Like what they were saying is that they're done at the state level, but different states have different criteria for what?Systemic different states have different criteria for what series, what merits attention.And this different standards for different states they saw as kind of a problem because when they're evaluating whether Alaska versus Washington state should get funding, then they're not able to kind of see a common scoring system for everything.To compare which stage you get the limited funding. So they wanted their own in House way to assess all of these national problems. And I say that I know I'm. I'm not being very concise, but I'm mentioning that because understanding why they're even asking to cluster I think is.Really important if you don't know why, then I don't think this AI assistant is gonna help.So they wanted this way to almost have their own report card rather than rely on the state level individual report cards which are on different standards.It's.And it's not that theirs would replace the state level, the state level, Department of Transportation agencies are gonna have more expertise and more detail, but they wanted to have kind of like a backup option to understand if they ever have questions, if they ever have disputes, can they?Fall back on their own analysis to understand enough.So that was important for that reason.OK.So then we went through examples of density based clustering.With that, we're not transportation that were tied.Well, I think it was transportation.It was the Waze example, so basically showing them different demonstrations of transport of like how to run the tool and we needed a an analyst there to be at the steering wheel, right? Not us doing it for them, but them kind of being.In control.Of the analysis.Her name is Caitlin.So Caitlin there.Basically had kind of like this drive to try to create this in House system and she wanted to impress, you know, her manager and her program with the system.So she was pretty eager to do this, which I think is also important if you don't have someone eager to do this, I don't think it'll work.And the first thing that we did is basically ran far's data fatal analysis reporting system data which just has fatal crashes across the country for a year period.Through density based clustering in its various ways.DB scan HDB scan optics and try to interrogate the results.Try to understand the differences between each one of the results from the well defined with DB scan to more data-driven with the other two approaches and what they easily found is that the tool has some limitations, right?So it doesn't work well with network data in many cases.It clusters things that are in different highways.So this crashes and this overlapping system.Kind of get clustered with crashes in this other system and that shouldn't be the criteria, so they.They basically first honed in on where do the results don't.Well, they honed in on the biggest clusters that came back consistently across the three approaches and they noted some problems with those clusters where they don't meet the criteria for being a systemic problem because of one or another reason.So it's more of like this very manual flavor of going into clusters, assessing what are the data problems there, assessing like theorizing. If we were to say this is the place that gets remediation does does that make sense to say that?Ankita Bakshi   35:02So when you just to clarify like when when you're running density based clustering with different methods like in this case like, you're not basically comparing which method is better, which one should I use? But but kind of trying to come up with locations that are consistently coming up.As clusters, when you run the tool in these different like modes or these three different algorithms, that was the purpose to run it like multiple times to.Identify places where it's just like consistent clusters appear in the data set.Is that true?Alberto Nieto   35:39I would clarify. No, I would clarify one thing that I miss explained. The first runs were just to get acquainted with the tool, just to understand the differences between the three methods. But pretty quickly I think we started honing down on optics.Ankita Bakshi   35:42Yeah.Alberto Nieto   35:55And just using optics as the approach DB scan was nice in some ways, but for a very specific question which is we have a set amount of crashes like let's say that there's a rule that.Some executive that they don't have, like Caitlyn, didn't know what someone is going to say. So it was challenging to do that.But she felt like DB scan is for one line of questioning and she liked it for that reason, right?But she didn't focus on that. What she wanted to do was more data-driven clustering and between HTTP scan and optics.She liked optics more, and part of it was the way we also talked about the tool that you have these charts that help you interpret clusters.Whereas HTTP scan is a bit more abstract or kind of difficult to understand.Why this particular cluster landed in optics?It's very explainable.You see the OR the reachability distance chart, so it's easy to kind of understand why? Why that's a cluster and tune it if you need to.So to be more, yeah, like now that I'm remembering like the sequence we started with like.A.A couple of hour sessions where we were just running and getting acquainted with running it and a lot of the answers were nonsense like gigantic clusters that didn't help.Or so many clusters that maybe it was hard to parse.Eventually we landed on optics and kind of just focusing on optics for awhile, and in that case, that's when we started looking at, OK.Let's go to this cluster.What does that mean?And then that's when we started seeing data problems of I-95 is intersecting with I-495.They should not.The cluster there is considering cratches from both systems.It should not stuff like that.And I'm keeping track.Please stop me if I'm being too longwinded.But the interesting part I'll say for the purposes of clustering.Is that?They then looked at.They then looked at a few things and I'm trying to organize it.I'm in my head 'cause. This was a while back.Basically, there were two efforts that took some time.Effort number one is to basically run clustering Hwy. by highway.So that you start to remediate those problems of overlapping highways which were coming back all the time. Basically the only clusters that it found were overlapping highways.So it's basically like a looping clustering.Sequence and you just wanted to ask for this particular study area, which is a highway.What are the clusters that come back?And then the second one I think is more interesting, which is we also wanted to see or they also wanted to see.Normalized by traffic.Where are the more systemic areas of the country with crash problems or accident problems, and that led to not density based clustering that led to hotspot analysis?Where basically each feature is not is a road segment and for that road segment you have the sense of how many vehicles drive along it per year. The average annual daily traffic.And if you take how many crashes happened divided by the average annual daily traffic that gives you about a rate of crashes right per per traffic.And that was useful to see.Basically dangerous areas, given their traffic, right?And that contrasts it with not contrast it, but like a different view of that problem that was different from the density based clustering one which is very much about raw counts.Density of raw calms, but now also looking at rates. They kind of started creating these layers of overlapping problems.And when you have a place that says for the rate, this seems to have quite a few problems, but also given the density of crashes that that's scoring it even higher.They started calling it like a a zone of concern, which is almost like an index made-up of multiple clusters.There is a story map.Actually I don't. If I if it's public, but I can.They made a zone of concern story map, which had these multiple ways of clustering.With their individual results and then kind of like a final overlapping index of all these clusters put together, what are the areas that?Seem to come back with most problems and also summarized by the state summarized by the county.Stuff like that.Which areas have the most zones of concern that meet all these criteria?OK.That's longwinded, but.That's the sequence that happened there. A bunch of trial and error, and eventually realizing that the single clustering view didn't give you the answer.It gives you an answer.But that's not satisfactory because there's other concerns like, OK, it's always gonna come back with the most populated areas as being problematic.La is always gonna come back as a problem.What about rural Ohio, where there's this problematic intersection?Therefore, we need to look at it in a different way, normalized, and we might need to go to hotspot analysis in that way and then all its data problems come to bear.Ankita Bakshi   41:33Yeah. Thank you.I think this is one of like the richest workflow that that we have captured for the training. It would be really great and if you find the story map and if it's public, that would be great too.Zeping Liu   41:39Yeah.Alberto Nieto   41:45Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   41:48I guess I have like I know, like the pain you had a couple other questions, but I'm really interested in one more question and then you can.Zeping Liu   41:56Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   41:56I was gonna be like the fly on the wall, but I think this was really interesting.Alberto, how? It's a very like open-ended question like all most of the questions that we've been asking.But how do you organize like clustering in your head? Like if.How is that in? Like how we there are so many methods and so many ways of doing clustering like how?How is it?Stored in your mind right now like how I just wanted to get like a snapshot of how you think about clustering.Alberto Nieto   42:30It's a cluster of no.Let's see.Yeah, that's interesting.I am biased because we within the team have come up with a structure for explaining this. So my way of organizing in my head is basically all driven by that, right by how our team explains these tools.And in that form, I'll still, you know, I think there's some merit to that and I think it does help people come to terms with the types of questions they can answer. But in my head, there's.You know what?I was about to go through that, but actually.I tend to think of it a bit differently.Sorry, let me reflect on it for just a moment and then actually tell you what I think.Ankita Bakshi   43:15Take good time.It was just like out of the blue so.Alberto Nieto   43:19Yeah.I'll think out loud for a moment.I feel like this might be good information for the foundational model, I hope.Ankita Bakshi   43:30Absolutely.Alberto Nieto   43:32It's like I want to say their statistical clustering, and then there's machine learning clustering, which is the way we've organized a lot of our things, right?But I don't know if I actually think that way.I think.Yeah, because.I've struggled with that breakout because.In my view there.'S.There's like this need to describe things as accurately as possible.And maybe to predict things, given that description, right?That's actually how I break it out in my head.So, like there's descriptive analysis where I want it to describe patterns out there and bubble up things that are actually not due to random chance, right?So in my head I I bunch it all up into descriptive analysis.Yes.And the purpose of that descriptive analysis is to be.As illustrative of what's happening in the real world as possible.I may want it to bubble up.Hard to find clusters where I say give me 20 stores no less within a month, no less.And show me what happens there or I may want it to be more data-driven based on the spatial density across the study area and how that differs.Show me what comes back, but either way, at the end of the day it's all descriptive analysis.It's all about telling me what's happening out there.So.Yeah, I bunch it all up into descriptive analysis. Whether that's hot spot analysis or density based clustering or emerging hotspot analysis. Once you include time or multivariate clustering, K means all of it is meant to show me some like labeling system for the world as it is now.And then from that I can make some decisions either using the existing labels, right?So if it labels, this intersection seems pretty promising for a bank.Do I agree or do I not?Then I can act on that, right?Or I can say OK, interesting.These were the clusters that it found.Maybe I want to estimate next month what will be the clusters given these past clusters, right? And then it gets into like modeling and prediction for the next set of data that will come.But in my head I don't make as much of A distinction between statistical and machine learning clustering, I think.I really just think of it as descriptive analysis.I hope that helps.Ankita Bakshi   46:24Yeah, definitely. I think one of the things that with these interviews is also helping me reflect is.Like why we made that distinction between statistical and machine learning?Because it was kind of like at that point, machine learning was just kind of getting really like traction to at that point became like a way for us to talk about that.Alberto Nieto   46:43Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   46:47We have machine learning in our.Like in our software, but not necessary like not.People are not coming and looking at the data and saying like I want to solve this problem with machine learning or I want to solve this problem with statistics like they want a method and not just like how that algorithm is working like is it is it doing?Alberto Nieto   47:00Ryan.Ankita Bakshi   47:10Some machine learning magic? Or is it doing statistical magic?So it's it's. I don't think that the distinction between like these things is like statistical machine learning is.Kind of like an actual distinction.It's more like more like something driven by like marketing and just like a little bit of that comes from the the way like the industry like right now AI is such a big thing.Alberto Nieto   47:25Right.Ankita Bakshi   47:36So like we try to talk a little bit more things from like terms of AI, but not necessarily.Like they're all like analysis.It's like sometimes it's driven by like what's going on in the industry for us to talk about it, but not necessarily like.That is the distinction that we think is most important for our users to think in terms of solving their problems.I appreciate that you mentioned it because like one of the things that zeping is going to do is like take our workshops also as like training set, but also keep that in mind that sometimes the the things that we are talking about, it's not necessarily like the the.The way to think about it, but sometimes driven by other factors too.Alberto Nieto   48:19Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   48:21But I guess when you say that you kind of think about this as all like descriptive analysis. Is it like everything under the sun for not under the sun, but for rtis pro clustering like with all of them?Is that something you put that under that criteria that everything that we do in clustering from build balanced zones and multivariate clustering and and like everything is?Like kind of comes into descriptive statistics. Or is there in like branches within that?That you would kind of think differently if you had different types of questions. I just like, are there further branching into that thought process?Alberto Nieto   49:00Yeah.Yeah, 'cause descriptive is way too broad of a category.Yeah, I think there is.And it's like interesting that you mentioned build Balan zones, because I think that one, even though it's currently in mapping clusters, if I'm correct.Ankita Bakshi   49:18Yeah. Yeah, it is.Alberto Nieto   49:19I actually think of it as a very different type of analysis, where the goal is not to describe things, but actually to prescribe an answer right to give me an answer, given some criteria that I've established, which is balance these zones based on these criteria, that's not descri.Things or I mean it's describing an answer, but to me that's actually I have the need to do this. Prescribe me the best answer given those needs.And tell me what's what.Where do I draw the line?That's very different to me from clustering.Clustering to me is.More exploratory in nature.It's like I have this data.Find the patterns in the data.Find the things that bubble up that are systemic or.We can reject a null hypothesis of spatial randomness for.But to answer your question so that one like build balanced ones, I would slot into a different category which is more like prescriptive analysis.But within descriptive analysis, are there categories?And yes, I think so. Like.Certainly, I think breaking time out into its own bucket helps in many cases because I think time is complex enough, like space on its own is.Interesting and nuanced enough to to come to terms with, but as soon as you bring in time and do spatial temporal clustering, there's some very tricky things there to keep.Keep track of the other thing that I think in my head now that I'm really exploring how I'm thinking about this, that I actually break out is.What characteristic are you clustering like the?Is it the location of events?Is it some attribute of events?S.Like some variable that you're tracking? Is it both in some manner?I think it's you combine the two. It gets a little bit fuzzy naturally, but I think that does help me then.Once again thinking about the real world use cases which are great at grounding these conversations.For nitza.We needed to just cluster based on location primarily and eventually based on some attribute.So based on location then that led US naturally to density based clustering. As soon as we started to think, OK, we need to normalize.Like what about rural areas?We can't just ignore rural areas. OK, then we need an attribute clustering method that goes to hotspot analysis.Yes.Or K means could also be interesting there, though that's a different question and I'm thinking out loud in a very messy way.I'm hoping this is helpful for the for anything that you're doing.But my thinking I think still is descriptive analysis, is a bucket and then what kind of description do you need right?Like location based descriptions, variablebased descriptions, some merging of the two in some way.Time based description.So merging of that, that's kind of the way I really organize it in my head.Ankita Bakshi   52:34That's that's really helpful.Alberto Nieto   52:37And I'll say one last thing, if you don't mind me talking so much.The statistical and machine learning part I do agree that a lot of it is marketing driven.There is one element of it that I think is.Useful though.Which is.A little bit, yeah. Struggle to even say it, but it's like.It's kind of going back to Zeping's question of what are the diagnostics that you get, right?Because with statistical clustering the sequence is quite clear in my view.There's a null hypothesis of spatial randomness.And you are using C scores and P values to find where that null hypothesis can be safely rejected or rejected with some level of confidence.And you can kind of understand that and how it lands at those clusters that way.So it's I think that distinction is useful to for for the people that understand that distinction of statistical back methods with these course P values and so on.I think that distinction does help them understand that that's how it's landing at clusters versus machine learning methods that.Are that's such a broad thing too, right?But at least it kinda.Separates it from statistical back methods.In the traditional sense.And but nevertheless, I I say that just to say, it's not just marketing, right?Ankita Bakshi   54:14Yeah, yeah.Alberto Nieto   54:15Yeah, like, and I agree with everything you were saying.Mankita, I think it is too stained by marketing to be useful at this point, but I think there is something about the OK the underpinnings are statistical in nature versus more modern data-driven things.Ankita Bakshi   54:34Yeah, I think they are distinct.Is just. Is this like for me it was.Is this the best way to like talk about it and like separate things out?I don't think personally that it's like it is the best way to do it is one way to do it. And there is like pros and cons to this method like it comes back to like the things like other other question that he was asking before like what?Alberto Nieto   54:47Agreed.Ankita Bakshi   54:57Are some of like the key most important like skills that?You probably need to have.Clustering and when you do, when you are doing like statistical clustering it kind of is.There's an assumption that you.Are aware of like OK, you're doing null hypothesis and like is. Is this data good enough for me to even like have a statistical model to begin with?There are some assumptions there, so it's just it's a little bit different of like the skill sets that people have that could be a distinction. But again, when you're solving a problem and really like do we really is the biggest.Alberto Nieto   55:28Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   55:35Thing is like this difference in the skill set versus like you should be thinking about it in terms of like other other factor which I'm not sure like what are the other big like criteria that we can use to like separate things out and have like 2 works.And not everything in one, something that we always struggle with to like.Put them into like how do we separate it?Because it's so much content.Like, how do we make sure that we can separate it in like multiple workshops? It still makes sense like on a cohesive level but also.We can cover things one hour at a time, but.Yeah, just to kind of make the point that yes, there is distinction.I completely agree.There is some distinction between like how you approach a statistical clustering problem versus how you approach a machine learning problem, because that's like you don't kind to know about those things.Alberto Nieto   56:21Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   56:29When you're doing machine learning clustering 'cause, that's like OK.That's more data-driven and you'd get the diagnostics.I think there's diagnostics in both.But the way that you understand those depends on the skill sets that you have.Like do you understand Z score?Do you understand P value versus like when you're looking at a data-driven cluster which is like a optics chart, like that's a different type of skill that you need to have, which is not what you probably need for your hot spot analysis.That's just a little bit difference in how you learn and think about it, but yeah.Alberto Nieto   56:58Yeah.And you just help me think of something Ankita that I think is really important, and I'm hoping that this is helpful for me to say.Ankita Bakshi   57:03I think there is.Alberto Nieto   57:10Umm.I think the way.I see it right now too.Is that picture this analyst right this this person?And they're gonna analyze using clustering.I think the the question that Zeping asked what are the statistical and mathematical skills that they need to have to do this properly?And this other side of things that I mentioned, which is they need to know the domain really well, right.They need to know the business problem really well.I would my answer made the business problem the highest by far and maybe the mathematical skill set lower.But I do want to say that it's like.There's two worlds, not worlds. Like there's these two rooms. I picture this person in right.The first room is the room where.They're in front of this executive that is gonna make the important decisions and the domain part takes center piece there, right?Like they need to ask questions.Have good human communication skills.Parse out the needs.Parse out the definition of best.But then they go back to their office, to their room as an analyst and the other one comes to the forefront, right.You need to run some analysis and feel confident that what's coming back is fruitful or like passes rigor and muster and you're not gonna give out trash even if it looks good.So I think like that second part of what statistical mathematical needs there are.Is still important whether the tool does it and carries the heavy burden or the heavier parts of that, or you do it as a statistically and mathematically minded person. But that happens kind of on their own right in my view.Like Caitlyn? In that case, the transportation person would have to go back and feel like she can validate these things that are coming back on her own.But then to sandwich it bubble back up to the domain. OK, we're making these clusters. They pass mathematical rigor.The way you communicated to the decision maker is not hey, this cluster passes all these statistical tests like you might say that or that might be a quality of clusters that they're looking for. But I remember for Capital One, there was a series of clusters that were produc.That mathematically were very solid, but in practice were complete garbage because they weren't it.It's so much more complex than does it.Does it completely pass the statistical test that we've outlined?Here it's so much more about vibes at the end of the day and other things that once again to aggregation.It's a.It's a hard challenge.I'm too long winded.Ankita Bakshi   1:00:00Thank you.Alberto Nieto   1:00:00Stop me at any point.Ankita Bakshi   1:00:01No, no, I mean like thank you.We are at the top of the hour, so like we I know zeping had like A use case that he wanted to also kind of see you can just play around with it. So we can capture the interaction.Would it be OK if we schedule like another 30 minutes or so with you? Like some time like tomorrow, OK?Alberto Nieto   1:00:23Yes, of course, whenever you want.Zeping Liu   1:00:23Yeah, yeah, I'll leave her.Yeah, just yeah.Ankita Bakshi   1:00:27Or later, yeah.Alberto Nieto   1:00:27That all sounds good.Zeping Liu   1:00:28But I think I have already got enough people, a lot of information from you. Thank you.Yeah, but the case is just like a supplementary thing. Yeah, so.Ankita Bakshi   1:00:36Yeah.Alberto Nieto   1:00:37OK.I'm hoping it's helpful.Zeping Liu   1:00:40Very helpful.Ankita Bakshi   1:00:40It was.It was really helpful. I think that's what we were looking for. Like to have that kind of.Alberto Nieto   1:00:41OK, great.Ankita Bakshi   1:00:48Like capture that interaction with users and like workflows. How you think about it?Zeping Liu   1:00:51Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   1:00:53Which methods you use?Which methods didn't work? And then you went to other method and then that like that is like the essence of clustering that we are trying to like capture from like different conversations.So that, I mean it's it was really helpful like the the way that you were saying things like oh, this will be such a good use.Case for like the model that that's a pain we're working on. So, so thank you.Zeping Liu   1:01:14Yeah, yeah, that's true.Yeah.Ankita Bakshi   1:01:17Appreciate your time, Alberto.Zeping Liu   1:01:18Thank you.Alberto Nieto   1:01:19Of course, I sympathize very much with your project.Zeping Liu   1:01:20Thank you so much.Alberto Nieto   1:01:22It's challenging.So anything that you guys need, just just ping at any point?Zeping Liu   1:01:27Thank you.Alberto Nieto   1:01:28Yeah, no problem.Nice to talk to you both.Ankita Bakshi   1:01:29Thank you.Alberto Nieto   1:01:29All right, bye.Ankita Bakshi   1:01:31Bye.Zeping Liu   1:01:31Bye.Zeping Liu stopped transcription