TranscriptMay 29, 2025, 3:04PMZeping Liu started transcriptionZeping Liu   0:04Yeah. OK. All right, pretty good.And yeah, so yeah, I will start with some general questions like thank you. Kevin, could you please briefly tell me about your experience in spatial analysis, particularly with spatial clustering, for example, how long have you been working in this field?What type of clock causing problems?Data size and application domains have you primarily dealt with.Kevin Butler   0:37Sure. I came to askri about 12 years ago from academia.I retired from the Department of Geography and Urban Planning, but I also worked in institutional research. So that's the unit of the university that studies the university.So it looks at course enrollments and retention patterns and those kinds of things.So very early on before.Spatial statistics was really even a field.I was doing just K means clustering to do work in that kind of domain.Fairly large datasets back then, then spatial statistics came along and I started using clustering algorithms.In primarily ecological applications, so creating alternative climate zones.At Esri, we produced a whole series of very large.Ecological information products that are called.EXUS so ecological land units, ecological coastal units. Ecological marine units.That's the water column. I'm working on. Ecological benthic units right now.The sea floor and finally we'll do ecological freshwater units.So these are all collections of ecological variables that we end up putting into K means clustering.Zeping Liu   2:07Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   2:08And producing what we hope are ecologically meaningful clusters and all of that work has has.Been well received? Yep. And that's been in collaboration with.Zeping Liu   2:20Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   2:23Experts in each one of these fields so.Zeping Liu   2:27Thank you.Yeah. And the second question is about thinking about the basical knowledge required for special clustering.What scale theory?What kind of, like statistical concepts, spatial principles?What kind of theory you think are most important in spatial clustering problem?Kevin Butler   2:49For me, clustering.Zeping Liu   2:50Mm hmm.Mm H.Kevin Butler   2:53Is a broad category of analysis.There's many different types of clustering. I do not consider clustering a statistical technique at all.Zeping Liu   3:03Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   3:04It is a dimension reduction technique, so I don't think you necessarily need statistical background in order to use it.But I think there are statistical concepts that really can help people understand and interpret the clusters coming out at the other end, and some of the necessary data engineering steps that you need to go into clustering.Zeping Liu   3:34Yeah, pretty cool.So the follow up question is like what kind of mathematical domains you think are important for?And that's a special classroom analysis.Kevin Butler   3:50It really follows the same kind of workflows.I think that you would do for any any statistical analysis.You have to be able to understand the distribution of the data.Zeping Liu   4:03Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   4:03You have to be able to at least wrap your head around this concept of of multidimensionality and the fact that you know we're measuring distances.Zeping Liu   4:16Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   4:16Not in 2D, which everybody can wrap their head around.But we're often doing it in 10 or 12 dimensional space.So if you can visualize those things, I think that's good.Zeping Liu   4:27Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   4:31The distributional assumptions that K means.Zeping Liu   4:34Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   4:36Assumes. I think it is important that you have some idea of distributions.Both of the data going in, I think you need some background in data transformations.Zeping Liu   4:52Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   4:53You know, we don't want any single variable to overwhelm the clustering.So we we need to typically standardize things before we go in understanding the impacts of those standardizations I think is important.Zeping Liu   4:58Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   5:12And then interpreting the clusters coming out.Zeping Liu   5:16Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   5:17Many of those same things apply there.'S understanding the difference between.You know what is a statistically significant difference between, say, the the means of of two clusters versus is that a practical difference?Zeping Liu   5:40Yeah.Yes, thank you.And yeah, so this is the the last question about this part is like I think it's it's hard just say what you have.In your opinion, what defines a successful or valuable spatial clustering results?In other words, like when you hire, just take some.I don't real real world application examples like when you do evaluations, how do you?Evaluate whether the result is good or bad, and how do you define the good and the bad.Kevin Butler   6:16OK.Ultimately, the litmus test for for us, since I work primarily in the ecological domain.Zeping Liu   6:17So.Kevin Butler   6:23Are or in the climate domain? Are these clusters interpretable and meaningful?Are there really?Zeping Liu   6:31Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   6:31You know, on the ground, understandable ecological differences between these. Did it pull out deserts and did it pull out tropical environments?If those kinds of environments are mixed together.Zeping Liu   6:48Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   6:49It's probably not a good clustering solution.The problem with with K means clustering is.It will cluster.It's rare that the K means or other clustering algorithms will not be able to solve. So for me they have to be at least looking at the map and be interpretable.Then on the statistical side, I do look for statistical separability between these between the clusters, often with parallel box plots and and things like that.And I look at that both as the clusters as a whole and I look at it based on individual variables.I it's important for me to know that I've got the most parsimonious set of variables.Was going into this, so if say I have temperature as one of my variables and I look and see, there's really no significant differences between temperature across. You know my all of my resulting clusters then that's probably not an important variable.Zeping Liu   8:06Yeah. So let's go back to your your answer back. The When you see the result, whether it is interpretable, how do you define this interpretable?I.I mean understanding is that they they are separated, they are not mixed, they are separated.So how do you find that they are? They are not mixed.I mean, did you use like the some guangchu or some background knowledge to to find out whether there are means or not?Kevin Butler   8:34Yes, primarily, you know, we call it the smell test. You know, we kind of look at the results for areas that we know well.Zeping Liu   8:38Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   8:46I usually start by the number of clusters you know. If it's dumping everything into two or three clusters, I probably don't have the correct number of variables. If I end up with 142 clusters.Zeping Liu   8:49Mm hmm.Mm hmm mm hmm.Kevin Butler   9:02Something's going on.In that case, I have a sense, you know.Zeping Liu   9:05Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   9:08Generally, going into any clustering analysis, just like when you teach mathematics, there's the mechanics, but you should have a sense for what the scale of the answer is. You know, by multiplying 2 numbers together.Zeping Liu   9:14Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   9:23You know two single digit numbers together.I shouldn't get a 50 digit answer coming out of that.Zeping Liu   9:30Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   9:30So it's kind of getting this sense going in.I always ask myself what?How many clusters do I really expect there to be in this study area?Zeping Liu   9:43Yeah, that's that's pretty important.I mean, how many clusters?How do you reason is precise I mean?How is there any organized you you you may have an expectation for the cluster number?Kevin Butler   9:59It's it's really just based on domain knowledge, yeah, if you're.Zeping Liu   10:02For me knowledge OK.Kevin Butler   10:06You know you're doing ecosystems work. You kind of have a sense.You know, you've literally walked to the area.Zeping Liu   10:10Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   10:13You know how many different ecosystems there might be there?Zeping Liu   10:13Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   10:19You've got to be open minded to discovering things that you didn't know were there, but at the same time, I'm not talking.Oh, I think there's 12 in the clustering said.There was 14.Therefore, I'm gonna throw out the results.I'm almost talking orders of magnitude.You know, ballpark.Zeping Liu   10:41Mm hmm.Sorry, what is ballpark?I I don't know.Kevin Butler   10:45I'm sorry, we just have to get close.We don't have to get.An exact number, yeah.Zeping Liu   10:52Oh, OK.Sure. Yeah. Thank you.Yeah, I think.Why? Why?I ask this questions like passing for this kind of AI system.The most difficult part is how to evaluate, especially some results that cannot, that some evaluation scenes cannot be covered to the matrix. I mean something that is very subjective is very difficult to to measure these things, yeah.Kevin Butler   11:18Mm hmm.Zeping Liu   11:19Sure. Thank you. Thank you.And yeah, so so this is the the best step that is that I will present you with a scenario and several scenario. You can choose one and I also have the data.Maybe you can just explore the data and just maybe check data and try to find some results. Some some methods that can do some special analysis and.Test and get some result to do some evaluation. That's the.Very simple process. Yeah, and I will share my screen to you and and also you can just choose one and I will copy and paste it to the chat box.OK.This is the the first first case.Is like it's it's about Polygon clustering.It's it's like I have a lot of. I have a sense of trash data. It contains a lot of attributes.And what do you want to what are your tasks like?Just try to identify this kind of community resilience profiles, because this this center data, it includes a lot of.Like disaster Resilience score a lot of informations. Maybe you can use it to analyze it, but is a very open-ended question so I didn't specify.Was kind of ultimate output. You should have it.Just you can explore it based on your understanding.So this is about Polygon clustering.Kevin Butler   12:52Mm hmm.Zeping Liu   12:54It's contain a lot of attributes.And this is about.About like the traffic pattern.So the data is a polyline.It's just a lot of Poly lines and each polylines is associated with two attributes.Is the they are these all the polyline? They are all the network.They are the last update date.Is that the? In other words, is the construction time and other shape of lens.Is the the lens of the road.So you maybe you can use it to find the the, the, the this kind of traffic impact assessment or traffic impact pattern based on point line customer?So this is the this is about.And another case is about point is is the data from some place Department of Transportation. A lot of points and the the points each point is associated with several attributes.The first one is the the the the crash. Most like a car or multi cycle and the so on and so forth and also the the accident the year of the accident.And also this point, this location the crash counts.So your task is like try to use this data to find some.Traffic collision signatures. All traffic collision patterns like maybe there are some recurring some unique patterns of crash types and frequency.This this kind of.Path so yeah.So which one you think and do you have any questions?Kevin Butler   14:43No, they're they're pretty clear.Zeping Liu   14:48Yes. So the first one is like a Polygon class. They have data and second one is polyline.And third one is by point is like the the point clustering.So I think you can just choose one like using that you can you think is most familiar because this is my first time to do so.Maybe there are some problems?I mean, it's just you can choose one and I will send it to the chat so you can copy the data.Kevin Butler   15:18Yeah, let's do the Community resilience profile one.Zeping Liu   15:22OK.Yeah, I will send it to you.Kevin Butler   15:24Yeah, for me, I I I don't really care which format the the data are in, if it's points or Poly lines.Zeping Liu   15:32Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   15:36You know, depending on if we end up doing spatial clustering or a spatial clustering.Zeping Liu   15:37Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   15:43The a spatial clustering doesn't really care about the underlying geometry, so.Zeping Liu   15:48Oh.Kevin Butler   15:50Yeah.Zeping Liu   15:50OK.So so yes, just a follow up question you based on these three cases is it's what I design, I mean what kind of suggestions you may hire for me like maybe I can refine this kind of questions or make more make it more that works or do you?Suggestions.Kevin Butler   16:11Yeah, I think that one of the first questions that I always ask myself is, am I going to do regular K means or am I going to do spatially constrained?So I might insert something one of these cases where space really wouldn't matter.Zeping Liu   16:30Oh, can you explain what is a space?Wouldn't matter. What does it mean?Kevin Butler   16:35Yeah. You know, in the in the cases, you know, say I'm, I'm doing something, you know.Zeping Liu   16:42Hmm.Kevin Butler   16:43For research.Zeping Liu   16:45Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   16:46Institutional research at your university, in this case my dado, would be data on students.And you know, maybe looking to see are there common patterns or groupings within students?In that case, I would just have a table.That I could cluster.There wouldn't be any spatial aspect to that at all.Zeping Liu   17:10Oh, I see you're right.Yeah, it's just based on table, yeah.Kevin Butler   17:14Mm hmm.Zeping Liu   17:16OK.So one is about.Oh, you mean there are two type of class and why is special special constraint class? And why another is that the special?Is this kind of special?Will not be so important.Like basically purely based on the data.Kevin Butler   17:33Mm hmm.Zeping Liu   17:34OK.Oh, that's you're right.Yeah. Thank you. OK.Chat box.Yeah, this is the the data and also I have I prepare.The explanation of the attributes and I will share it.****.OK.So the first link is, it's the data and the second link is the. The meaning of each each attribute.Yeah. So I will step solve my sharing and.OK.Kevin Butler   18:35And should I?Should I just go ahead and add that data in?Zeping Liu   18:41Maybe you can if it was becoming you can share your screen like I can record your precise select. Yeah. Thank you.Just imagine that you have this task and you want to analyze it.So I just want to see how you analyze it.Uh.What book?Kevin Butler   19:20Not public.Zeping Liu   19:22Oh, OK.Oh, sorry, because I I can't assess it.Maybe. OK, I will change the sorry.Let me see.Data share.Can you just do data clean?Maybe. Maybe. I think maybe it can.It is all public.Sorry, let me see.See.Maybe you catch fire. Sorry, sorry, sorry.Kevin Butler   21:47I mean.Looks like you're sharing the rest endpoint though.There we go.Zeping Liu   22:04OK.I just maybe it will load for a moment.It's just 1000, part of United States. Not all the parts because the data is too large.It's just this this several regions here.Kevin Butler   22:26Yep.So I always copy the data because I can't do any data engineering and it's relatively slow to access it from a feature service and I'm probably gonna be rereading it multiple times so.Zeping Liu   22:59Oh.Oh, that's a very important information. Yeah. Oh.Kevin Butler   23:04Yeah, I just usually.You know, clustering is always iterative.I'm gonna be running multiple clusters and I just don't wanna read the data from the web many many times.Zeping Liu   23:13Mm hmm.Oh, OK.Kevin Butler   23:22Just takes a few seconds to copy.Zeping Liu   23:26Mm hmm.Yeah.Kevin Butler   23:50And look at the data quickly just to see what variables are there.Clustering is always purposeful.You know I'm I'm selecting variables in order to create clusters for some purpose.Zeping Liu   24:02Yeah.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   24:04You know, when I do ecology work, you know, we want ecological clusters.Zeping Liu   24:10Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   24:10You know, in this case we're looking for creating unique profiles of community resilience.But there's many different resilience to what there's many different kinds of resilience, you know, is it resilience to climate or, you know, economic impacts or those kinds of things. So for me, every decision that I make from this point forward depends upon what is the purpose of the.Zeping Liu   24:20Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   24:42Clustering itself.Zeping Liu   24:43Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   24:45And.Zeping Liu   24:46Yeah. And I also sent a link about the meeting of these attribute just a a document.Kevin Butler   24:52Yeah.Zeping Liu   24:53Yeah. So you can.Have it, OK.On the chat chat box.Kevin Butler   24:59Yeah.Yeah, I'm looking at it on my other screen. I know most of these variables.Zeping Liu   25:04Off.Wow.Kevin Butler   25:08Eal rating.I don't.OK.So it's already has a A Community resilience score in there.So guess then the question is.We're trying to identify.Zeping Liu   25:46Orville. Yeah, it's very open-ended question. I will send it to you again.Kevin Butler   25:50Yeah.Zeping Liu   25:51It's just to you.Kevin Butler   25:52Yeah.Zeping Liu   26:00Just maybe you can define what kind of output would like.Kevin Butler   26:10Just making sure.OK.Yeah. So this is the one that I'm interested in.What I would do is if a resiliency score has already been created, then the clusters that I'm looking for are likely are there are.There collections groups of census tracts that have similar resiliency scores.Zeping Liu   26:29Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   26:39I don't need clustering necessarily.In order to do that.Zeping Liu   26:45Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   26:45When you symbolize on a map.Zeping Liu   26:49Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   26:50You know, kind of by graduated colors. And I do natural breaks.Zeping Liu   26:56Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   26:57Umm.I'm already starting to see some patterns, so I always do exploration like this to see are there underlying patterns in whatever variables are going into the clustering.Zeping Liu   27:08Hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   27:15Because if they've got a spatial structure, I would expect that spatial structure to be represented in in the clusters themselves.Zeping Liu   27:24OK.Sorry for interrupt, it's just so firstly you will visualize some attributes and to see some potential clusters and this kind of information may get you like you choose the class of numbers like and the to interpret the results is that am I right?Kevin Butler   27:41Yeah. And to see what impact the variables will have on the clustering, yeah, so.Zeping Liu   27:42Oh, thank you so.Kevin Butler   27:49I'm already seeing patterns.You know, there's clearly.We're seeing urban, rural, strong, urban, rural patterns, but we're also seeing looks like, at least on this resiliency score.In inner cities.You know, I can just pick those out from this map.Zeping Liu   28:11Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   28:12Automatically.OK, so I think I wanna. I wanna look at this resiliency score.Oh, we were looking at population. No wonder.I wanna look at the resiliency score itself.S.I have to get the right variable.Resl score.Ah, Pro is so difficult.Yeah, certainly.It's notable differences between Louisiana and Texas, and certainly seeing coastal patterns here, so I'd I would want to look out for those in the resulting clusters.Zeping Liu   29:28Mm hmm.Is it?Kevin Butler   29:41Looking down through the variables to see what kinds of questions I would ask, what concerns me right off the bat is is there's a lot of variables which.Are kind of already analyzed.It's got their their rating.Zeping Liu   30:02Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   30:03They're an index score of some kind.That worries me sometimes of putting those things into clustering. You know, they've already been categorized.Zeping Liu   30:15Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   30:16And so putting those in as continuous variables when I don't know their distributions or how they were created would be a little bit concerning to me.Zeping Liu   30:25Mm hmm.OK.Kevin Butler   30:28Yeah, I think having.Underlying data.Zeping Liu   30:34Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   30:35'Cause, when I first approached this problem.I assumed that I would be creating clusters where there were homogeneous characteristics of resilience. You know, like people have higher income values, they have higher access to vehicles.You know, they've there's multiple sources of income into the household.All of those variables would indicate resilience.See to me. But when I look at this data set.I'm seeing a lot of data that's already been analyzed.Zeping Liu   31:15Mm hmm.OK.Kevin Butler   31:17So I don't know that I would really use clustering for this kind of problem.I mean probably I would.You know, I want to look at that variable in data engineering.OK.That's good. No nolls.Yeah, this looks already like.Zeping Liu   32:10Mm.Kevin Butler   32:12It's been normalized.You know, it's on a 0 to one scale.I wouldn't cluster this to be honest with you.Zeping Liu   32:29So they you mean based on this data there is no no need to do special cluster.Kevin Butler   32:31Yeah.Right. Yeah. There's too much analysis went into creating that essentially that index, that score. And I suspect it's composite.Zeping Liu   32:37Uh.Kevin Butler   32:46They probably included multiple variables, created an index, and then normalized that index.There's not a lot of variance left, you know.Zeping Liu   33:00Sure. Yeah, I collect this data from.Organization. I think it's it's a well established, yeah, but OK, sure.Do you mind?Like maybe we can use another case like because I think special classes I I want to see how you use special class like.Kevin Butler   33:14OK.Zeping Liu   33:21So, so we so the the live 2 cases, one is about the point line, the traffic the.And otherwise.But accidents.So that point data is about accident traffic accidents.Kevin Butler   33:35Yeah, let's try the the second one, the traffic and I can take a look at that.Zeping Liu   33:38OK.Yeah. Thank you.Give the data.This is the estimate data.This is the the prompt for the question.Is in another place.Kevin Butler   35:09Yeah, I think this data's gonna be a little hard.For people to interpret, I've got bicycle crashes here and I have bicycle crashes here.Looks like.It's a group layer.I see what's going on.Yeah, I get people a single data set. It's gonna be gonna take people 10 minutes to figure out, kind of what the what the data are.Zeping Liu   35:43Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   36:08Let me just open up this attribute table and maybe it'll be clearer.Yeah. In these cases, there's really.Not much data here to cluster.Zeping Liu   36:28Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   36:29I would probably end up having to enrich this.Zeping Liu   36:34Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   36:36And clustering, you know, along the networks, you know, can always be.Problematic. I would want aspects of the road.I would want kind of weather conditions at the time that the accident occurred.Zeping Liu   36:55Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   36:58Umm.Zeping Liu   36:58Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   37:06I would probably do visibility analysis.And then again, I I'm not sure that this would be a good clustering kind of of problem.Zeping Liu   37:19I mean my understanding is like maybe just because the valid data is difficult for, for, for myself, I mean if based purely based on this data, but is it OK?Is it good that maybe we create a fishnet like?We did.We automatically create some, create some spatially analysis unit, and do some statistic based on spatial overlay and then do clustering.Is is it a possible solution? I don't.Kevin Butler   37:50You know the problem is then I have to assign attributes that.So let's say we aggregate even into hexagons, OK.Zeping Liu   37:57Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   37:58Which would follow the Road Network's better.And then I after I aggregate into hexagons.I'm gonna lose so much information, you know. You know, there could have been a particularly bad year for crashes.Zeping Liu   38:22Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   38:22Maybe there was a lot of rain that year.And let's say I had five crashes within that hexagon.It could have been raining sometimes, not raining. Other times, one of the crashes could occur on a curve and the others occurred on a straight Rd.Code for some reason, umm, when you aggregate that data up into hexagons, you lose all of that granular data about the individual crashes.Crashes are results of.The vehicles themselves, the conditions at the exact time of the crash, individual decisions that that driver made or aspects of that driver.Was their alcohol? Are they older?Did it happen at night?It would be difficult to aggregate all of those variables up.Zeping Liu   39:23Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   39:24So when clustering, I always start kind of with this idea.What are the variables that truly contribute?What are the drivers for the thing that I'm clustering?Zeping Liu   39:36Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   39:40So I think for a clustering problem, when it related to accidents, I would probably ask myself, are there common physical?And you know, personal attributes.Zeping Liu   39:57Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   40:01That when grouped together.Impact crashes.Yeah.Zeping Liu   40:09OK.Sure. OK. Thank you.Assuming that if we have the this kind of other conditions other like wider and this kind of information, what kind of pipeline you will use, just assuming we have this kind of data.Kevin Butler   40:25So typically, always data engineering 1st.Well, step zero is understanding what's my goal for clustering.Zeping Liu   40:29Mm.Kevin Butler   40:34You know, I want to create homogeneous regions of what?Zeping Liu   40:34Mm hmm.Mm.Kevin Butler   40:40Finding the appropriate variables that go into the into into determining those. Those clusters doing data engineering on those I don't want missing values in there.Zeping Liu   40:43Hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   40:54I want to make sure that my data all has reasonable ranges and I understand the variability of that data.I would map each one of those variables in order to take a look at them to see are there underlying spatial patterns in those variables that might ultimately.You know, show up in the clusters.Zeping Liu   41:18Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   41:20I would do.Correlations.You know, I've got this idea of multicolinearity.I don't want to include variables twice.Zeping Liu   41:32Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   41:32So I always look, you know, for multicolinearity and remove redundant variables.Zeping Liu   41:39Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   41:41Depending on which software that I'm using, I sometimes I have to transform the data myself.Zeping Liu   41:48Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   41:48To a zero to one scale.Zeping Liu   41:51Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   41:51And then the chief problem with clustering all the time is how many clusters.Zeping Liu   42:00Yeah. How many clusters? Yeah.Kevin Butler   42:02Yeah.Zeping Liu   42:03So this kind oh, so yes.Still, how many cluster is that based on?Maybe visualizations of some attributes like background knowledge, this kind of thing to determine?Kevin Butler   42:15Well, you know what I want is, is. I don't want to draw the map myself.You know, you give me a map of California. I could draw the ecosystems, but that's pretty subjective. The whole purpose of doing clustering for me is to have an objective way of of defining the clusters.Zeping Liu   42:22Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   42:37So I would run.I always run, you know.Starting at 3 clusters.And run all the way up to sometimes 25, sometimes 50 clusters on the same data set. Looking at the pseudo F chart and to look for peaks in the pseudo F.Zeping Liu   42:54Mm hmm.Mm hmm.So this is the statistical way to see the number of clusters.Kevin Butler   43:06Right. And then following all of my rules, if you know, I thought there were 12, maybe there's a peak around 14. So I'll start looking at that. And then I look for other peaks and often what you see is.Zeping Liu   43:16Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   43:24The higher numbers of clusters are really just fragments.Are there fragmenting?You know the 12 clusters.Zeping Liu   43:33Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   43:33Sometimes that's meaningful.But you have to have a sense of the granularity.So then once I get my clusters, I've, you know, kind of identified what I think is an optimal number of clusters. Then I start looking for spatial patterns.Then I look at the very the the individual clusters and saying is there really a meaningful significant difference between these clusters?You know, if it's between cluster one and two, you know the mean temperature is.20° in cluster 1:00 and it's 20.2° in cluster 2.That may be a statistically significant difference, but it's not a practical difference.Zeping Liu   44:23Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   44:25So looking at whether or not the clusters are indeed well separated within variable space, then I move to try to get a sense of variable importance.Zeping Liu   44:26Mm H.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   44:39You know which one of these variables is driving.The cluster.Zeping Liu   44:44Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   44:44The cluster ring.Which is very difficult in our software in just about any software.Zeping Liu   44:51Mm.Kevin Butler   44:56And then go ahead.Zeping Liu   44:57OK.Thank you.Can you just explain a little bit about how to you want to find the driver?Like how?What kind of approaches you will use to find the drivers behind this kind of class?Kevin Butler   45:11Usually look at box plots and look to see.Zeping Liu   45:13Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   45:17You know we have.You seen our parallel box plots that come out of our clustering.Zeping Liu   45:21Yeah.Kevin Butler   45:22You know, if I look, if those lines are all converging for say I have 6 clusters and all six of those lines are converging to the mean of temperature. OK.Zeping Liu   45:34Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   45:35There's no variability within temperature within those clusters. It's not driving.The output in any way, so I look for separation of those cluster means within the box plot for each one of of that.Zeping Liu   45:42Mm hmm.Hmm.Kevin Butler   45:53That often doesn't work.If you're publishing, you've got to have a better way to do it, and I do canonical correlation analysis.Zeping Liu   45:56Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   46:03We don't have it in our software.I have to use third party software to do it.Zeping Liu   46:08Hmm.Kevin Butler   46:08But you essentially, you know.Zeping Liu   46:13Mm H.Kevin Butler   46:14Variable and then you put your clustered variables, your explanatory variables in and it'll give you some sense of a variable importance.Zeping Liu   46:28Pretty, pretty much, yeah.And let me let me sync.Yeah. Just go back to the method.I mean.Like just assuming like you we have multi variables like they are, they are influencing with each other.So what kind of class they will use? And?Like like multivariable cluster like like DB.Yeah. What kind of method you typically use?Kevin Butler   47:01Yeah. I typically just start with pure K means.Zeping Liu   47:05Correct me, yeah.Kevin Butler   47:06And often.For ecological applications, they produce beautifully spatially constrained clusters.Zeping Liu   47:12Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   47:16And that's a strong indication to me that I have good variables in my clustering. If you're seeing strong spatial patterns that you expect.Zeping Liu   47:16Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   47:27Coming out of a spatial K means then you've got some pretty meaningful.Zeping Liu   47:30OK.Kevin Butler   47:31Meaningful variables in there.I will sometimes go to K meteoroids just to be safe and compare those kinds of differences, and if the data are not super large, I will run spatially constrained multivariate clustering.Zeping Liu   47:37Mm H.OK, OK.Kevin Butler   47:50Yep.Zeping Liu   47:52Just take K means as example like if I remember correctly that K means there are some high parameters in it like like the.Let me think the distance metric like how to calculate how to measure the distance. Am I right?I don't.Kevin Butler   48:10I.Zeping Liu   48:11And also some how to decide the the initial point like the the, the, the to initialize the point location. How I mean this kind of higher parameter? How how do you decide this kind of?Kevin Butler   48:25We generally don't let people do that.Zeping Liu   48:29Mm.Kevin Butler   48:30I you know when?I have an initial set of seeds their selected randomly. I keep track of those for for replicability, so that I can reproduce it, but I always rerun the clustering. So say I get 6 clusters.Zeping Liu   48:42Yeah.Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   48:50I rerun the clustering with random seeds.You know multiple, multiple, multiple times and I better be getting fairly consistent clusters coming out of that.Zeping Liu   48:55Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   49:03It's very difficult to do in our system. You know, I just simply have to look at maps and you know, so I'll run 6 clusters 10 times, produce 10 different maps. Each one of those maps had a different seed. And then I look at the maps and say.Zeping Liu   49:11Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   49:24Are the broad spatial patterns about the same?As far as distance metrics go.I use other software outside of ours.Zeping Liu   49:36Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   49:37It doesn't make a huge difference.Zeping Liu   49:40OK.Kevin Butler   49:41It it really doesn't if.You know.If the clusters are meaningful, if there are, if there are truly clusters within the data, almost any of those methods are going to pick them out.There are just too fine-tuned.And I can't see well with our software. We don't give people that ability. We've got very few parameters that they can actually control.Zeping Liu   50:10Hmm.Yeah.Kevin Butler   50:18Sometimes if I'm not getting great clusters, it's it's often the curse of multidimensionality.That I'm dealing with, you know.Zeping Liu   50:27Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   50:30My rule of thumb, if you've got more than 6 to 8 variables going in K means starts to break down.Zeping Liu   50:35Mm hmm.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   50:39So I work very hard not to try to put 30 variables into a clustering, so sometimes I will do dimension reduction on the variables themselves and I'll do PCA there.And then I'll do.What we call tisni.Zeping Liu   50:59Using, yeah.Kevin Butler   51:00Yeah, and.Often tisni because it's nonlinear, produces some pretty good results that then go into the clustering.Zeping Liu   51:05Mm hmm.Yeah.So yeah, you're right.Like this kind of dimension reduction.So.Like PCA and Tiffany.I mean.How to say during different cases?That's the the choice of reduction method.We all have some impact on different cases, yeah.Kevin Butler   51:32Absolutely. Yep.If yeah, if the interactions are truly non linear then you know you should be using tizni.Zeping Liu   51:34So we'll see how, yeah.Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   51:43PCA is easy so.But I it's just then you really it's very difficult then to interpret.The results, but I never summarize the clusters based on.Zeping Liu   52:01Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   52:03And the reduced variables I always go back and and build those box plots on the original variables.Zeping Liu   52:12Mm H.Thank you.Yeah. So pretty much the last question. Like if you are the user of, I mean AI assistance, this kind of AI system can generate pipeline.What's your expectations to this kind of this kind of AI system?Bye.If we have a special clustering AI system, what's your expectations of of?Kevin Butler   52:37I would want it to at least step me down through the entire process that I I follow, you know, number one question for me is this.Is this appropriate?You know what's my question?Zeping Liu   52:54Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   52:55Is this appropriate for clustering?What kind of clustering should I be you know?Should I be doing? What are the benefits?The pros and cons of the different approaches.And then helping me select which variables might influence those clusters.And looking getting in the mechanics of the clustering is, you know, looking at the data values and suggesting to me that I should transform giving me some advice about whether or not I need to do dementia reduction.Helping me interpret those box plots.To answer those important questions of is the number of clusters you know optimal?Is there separation amongst the clusters?Are the clusters you know homogeneous? You know if I'm getting box plots that you know are showing massive ranges of data, those clusters are not very tight and I want those clusters to be.Zeping Liu   53:58Mm hmm.Yeah.Kevin Butler   54:06Tight. So evaluation of the clusters themselves.Then understanding variable importance.It would be pretty much the entire workflow.Zeping Liu   54:22Yeah. OK.Thank you.The last the final is like. So you in these two cases you think it's not so suitable to do special classes.Maybe when we if the system, when they see these two cases, maybe they just based on this data they just do some visualize.That's it.They don't need to do three class.Kevin Butler   54:40Yeah, you know, at least for K means you know, if I'm trying to do multivariate clustering, I might do density based clustering on this.Zeping Liu   54:43OK means.Kevin Butler   54:49Absolutely. That's kind of.Zeping Liu   54:50Hmm.Kevin Butler   54:52All but it boils down to understanding what the what the question is up front.You know, it's very different to say, you know, are there spatial clusters? You know, based on density versus are there?Zeping Liu   54:59Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   55:09Homogeneous, you know groups of accidents based on a set of attributes.Both very good questions, but very different questions.Zeping Liu   55:22Yeah. So maybe this is suitable for some density clustering like. OK, thank you.Kevin Butler   55:25Yeah, yeah.Zeping Liu   55:27Yeah. Thank you.Thank you so much.Yeah. And there are a lot.Actually I don't.Too much?Yeah, this is my first time, but yeah.Kevin Butler   55:33Yeah.Yeah. So maybe some alternate data sets with things that people can wrap their heads around.I suggest neighborhoods you know, basically, saying vernacular neighborhoods you know, you know what neighborhood you live in. In Austin, you know what would be the attributes that kind of define what a neighborhood is.And you know, that might be similar age groups similar income.Zeping Liu   56:06Mm hmm.Kevin Butler   56:06Similar architectural style. Similar distances from downtown.Just maybe something a little easier for folks to wrap their heads around, so.Well, cool.I'm presenting in another meeting.Zeping Liu   56:20Yes, thank you.Thank you so much. Yeah.Kevin Butler   56:22Now just reach out anytime. It doesn't have to be a formal meeting. If I'm green, just send me a message and we can always chat.Zeping Liu   56:26Yeah.Thank you.Yeah, definitely. Thank you.Kevin Butler   56:31All right, cool.This is fun, right?Zeping Liu   56:33Thank you.Kevin Butler   56:34Bye bye.Zeping Liu   56:35Bye.Zeping Liu stopped transcription