Urban Scaling in Europe

Lu´ıs M. A. Bettencourt1,∗, Jos´e Lobo2
1Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Rd, Santa Fe NM 87501, USA,
2 School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, 800 Cady Mall, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA.
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: bettencourt@santafe.edu

October 6, 2015

Abstract

Over the last decades, in disciplines as diverse as economics, geography, and complex
systems, a perspective has arisen proposing that many properties of cities are quantitatively
predictable due to agglomeration or scaling effects. Using new harmonized deﬁnitions for
functional urban areas, we examine to what extent these ideas apply to European cities.
We show that while most large urban systems in Western Europe (France, Germany, Italy,
Spain, UK) approximately agree with theoretical expectations, the small number of cities in
each nation and their natural variability preclude drawing strong conclusions. We demon-
strate how this problem can be overcome so that cities from different urban systems can be
pooled together to construct larger datasets. This leads to a simple statistical procedure to
identify urban scaling relations, which then clearly emerge as a property of European cities.
We compare the predictions of urban scaling to Zipf’s law for the size distribution of cities
and show that while the former holds well the latter is a poor descriptor of European cities.
We conclude with scenarios for the size and properties of future pan-European megaci-
ties and their implications for the economic productivity, technological sophistication and
regional inequalities of an integrated European urban system.

Keywords: Agglomeration effects, GDP, Urbanized Area, Innovation, Population Size Distri-

bution, Megacities.

5
1
0
2

t
c
O
4

]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
2
0
9
0
0
.
0
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
1

Introduction

European nations are some of the oldest extant urban systems in the world [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].

Many contemporary European cities have centuries, if not millennia, of history, often stretching

back to medieval or classical times. Over this long span of time, each european city has experi-

enced periods of profound crisis alternating with booming development and has seen enormous

demographic, economic, political and spatial transformations [8]. From this rich historical per-

spective, we may expect each European city to be exceptional and unique, and not to conform

to any particular quantitative expectation [8, 9].

However, the opposite perspective –that all cities share certain predictable quantitative properties-

has slowly emerged from empirical studies and theoretical considerations developed by a vari-

ety of disciplines, including economics [10, 11, 12], geography [13, 14, 15], engineering [16]

and complex systems [17, 14, 18, 19]. All these disciplines explain the existence and develop-

ment of cities as the result of the interplay between centripetal and centrifugal ”forces”, which

in turn result from socioeconomic advantages of concentrating human populations in space

and account for associated costs. These are known as agglomeration or scaling effects and

constitute the foundational concepts for explaining the formation and persistence of cities any-

where [11, 20, 19]. Urban agglomeration effects are based on the observation of systematic

changes in average socioeconomic performance, land use patterns and infrastructure charac-

teristics of all cities as functions of city size. Such relations are known across the sciences as

scaling relations [21], which relate macroscopic properties of a system–here a city–to its scale

(size). For this reason, the systematic study of such relationships in cities is known as urban

scaling.

Clearly, these two perspectives – emphasizing what is particular and what is general about

cities – are at odds with each other [10, 22]. Each, on its own, is too simple to be fully correct,

2

while both should be expected to play a role to a greater or lesser extent in explaining the ob-

served properties of any city. Thus, the interesting question is to what extent can the properties

any city be predicted by general considerations and how to quantitatively assess the exception-

ality of each place [22]. There is probably no better place to engage in this exercise than in

Europe. Here, we tackle this tension by analyzing extensive evidence for the cities of the Eu-

ropean Union where strong national context also plays an important role on top of city-speciﬁc

factors.

The empirics and the theory of urban scaling are now mature enough that quantitative expec-

tations for scaling relations can be formulated and measured in many urban systems around the

world. However, the properties of contemporary European urban systems have been studied less

than those of other nations, especially the United States [23, 10, 12, 15]. Given the movement

in Europe towards greater political and economic integration, especially within the framework

of the European Union, it is particularly interesting to compare and contrast persistent regional

differences and continental convergence among European cities.

Comparative quantitative studies of the properties of European cities have been hampered

by a lack of data for consistently deﬁned socioeconomic units of analysis. General theoreti-

cal considerations and empirical practice lead us to view cities as integrated socio-economic

networks of interactions embedded in physical space [12, 19]. Capturing this logic when de-

lineating urban units of analyses requires that data be collected in a consistent manner across

a number of multi-dimensional criteria leading to the concept of functional cities. The deﬁni-

tion of functional cities, as integrated socioeconomic units, has become the gold standard for

any scientiﬁc analysis of the properties of cities and urban systems. The U.S. Census Bureau

has a long-standing, and arguably the most consistent, deﬁnition of functional cities, known as

Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs), dating back to the 1950s and updated annually 1. MSAs

1For historical deﬁnitions of MSAs see http://www.census.gov/population/metro/data/

3

consist of a core county or counties in which lies an incorporated city (a politico-administrative

entity) with a population of at least 50,000 people, plus adjacent counties having a high de-

gree of social and economic integration with the core counties as measured through commuting

ties. MSAs are in effect uniﬁed labor markets reﬂecting the frequent ﬂow of goods, labor and

information, which in turn is a proxy for intense socioeconomic interactions [24].

In Europe, the identiﬁcation of consistent (functional) territorial units has been a goal for

some time now as such deﬁnitions, and the socioeconomic characteristics of the delineated

territories, play important roles in the formulation of European Union (EU) policies and the al-

location of EU funds, for example, the structural funds for regional development and cohesion.

Until recently, several systems of territorial units have co-existed in European statistical bu-

reaus. Most are based on the Eurostat’s Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS)

classiﬁcation system 2, with urban NUTS3 corresponding roughly to integrated territorial units

that can have an urban character. For these reasons, urban NUTS3 and other deﬁnitions have

been the focus of several studies of agglomeration effects in European cities, using econometric

analyses [25, 20, 26, 27, 28]. A uniﬁcation of NUTS3 into larger functional cities has also been

proposed and resulted in Larger Urban Units (LUZ) and Metropolitan Areas (MAs), used in

different European Union Statistics’ urban audits. However, the NUTS system borrows heavily

from underlying older, country speciﬁc, territorial units and, as such, is not consistently deﬁned

across different European nations.

An effort to deﬁne functional cities in a conceptually meaningful and empirically consis-

tent manner has been recently undertaken by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and

Development (OECD), in collaboration with the EU [29]. This has resulted in a new set of har-

monized metropolitan area deﬁnitions across the European Union and other OECD nations3. At

pastmetro.html

2See

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nomenclature_of_Territorial_Units_for_

Statistics

3For

a

detailed

discussion

of

the

how the

EU and

the OECD have

delin-

4

present, these deﬁnitions represent the most consistent attempt to deﬁne functional urban areas

in Europe, making contact with those of other nations such as, for example, the US, Mexico,

and Japan. The advent of this dataset presents a novel opportunity to comparatively analyze

the properties of European cities as a function of their population size, for which there are a

number of theoretical expectations and comparative empirical evidence from other urban sys-

tems [30, 17, 19]. Here we take a ﬁrst step in this direction, by analyzing and discussing the

scaling properties of OECD-EU Metropolitan Areas (MAs) for the ﬁve largest urban systems in

Western Europe, namely France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. This allows

us to consider some of the properties of these national urban systems and comment on special

cases and statistical uncertainties resulting from the relatively small number of large cities in

each of these nations. To tackle this problem, we show how data for most cities in the Euro-

pean Union can be pooled together while respecting national differences in social and economic

development. In this way, we test urban scaling at the continental level, thus bypassing some

of the statistical difﬁculties of small datasets in each nation. This procedure also allows us to

characterize regional and national differences in urban population sizes and economic perfor-

mance across different European urban systems and discuss such results in the context of the

pan-European population size distribution of cities.

2 Results

2.1 Expectations from Urban Scaling

We start by explicitly stating the expectations and realm of applicability of urban scaling the-

ory as a model for analyzing the empirical properties of European cities. Details of the theory

and derivation of quantitative predictions for parameters are given in [19]. Scaling relations

metropolitan

eated
Definition-of-Functional-Urban-Areas-for-the-OECD-metropolitan-database.
pdf. For maps and all data see http://measuringurban.oecd.org

http://www.oecd.org/gov/regional-policy/

areas

go

to

5

are naturally written in terms of scale-free functions (power laws) [21]. Other proposals, using

logarithms [31, 32], also ﬁt the data well in the regime where these functions agree analyti-

cally4, but implicitly introduce a scale at which the properties of cities would have to change

drastically [18]. Thus, urban scaling proposes that any city-wide property (e.g. total GDP or

urbanized area), Y , should be written as

Y (N, t) = Y0(t) N (t)βeξ(t),

(1)

where N (t) denotes a city’s population at time t, Y0(t) is a baseline pre-factor common to all

cities and β is a dimensionless scaling exponent (or elasticity, in the language of economics).

Y0(t) is a function of time, t, capturing nation-wide socioeconomic development (or decline).

The exponent, β, has a special status as it is assumed to be time-independent, and as such

a conserved quantity across time in any urban system. Theoretical considerations show that

the exponent β is determined by general geometric considerations [19], and thus that such

an assumption may be justiﬁed. Scaling analysis of ancient settlement systems lends some

additional empirical support to this idea [33, 34]. The variable ξ(t) accounts for deviations in

each city from the expected (power-law) scaling relationship. As written, Eq. 1 is exact as any

deviation from the power-law function in each city is absorbed into the corresponding ξ. Thus,

the appropriateness of any scaling function to describe urban properties is tied to the statistics

of ξ [35, 18].

In most urban systems thus far analyzed empirically, it has been found that the statistics of

ξ are approximately Gaussian, with a mean over all cities in the system equal to zero ((cid:104)ξ(cid:105) =

0) and a quantity-dependent variance roughly of order unity (σ2

ξ = O(1)). The properties

of the variance remain largely unexplored and require further study. The properties of ξ as

an approximate Gaussian random variable with zero mean justify using the simplest ﬁtting

4Note that Y (N ) = Y0N 1+δ = Y0N eδ ln N = Y0N (1 + δ ln N + 1

2 (δ ln N )2 + ...) (cid:39) Y0N ln N/e , for small

δ ln N . So if ln N < 1/δ, see below, these functions are essentially the same analytically.

6

procedure for Y vs N , a linear relations in logarithmic variables and minimizing ordinary least

squares (OLS):

ln Yi = ln Y0 + β ln Ni + ξi,

(2)

so that the exponent β is the slope of the linear regression and the prefactor, ln Y0, is its ordinate

at the origin (N = 1). This also means that the scaling relation Y (N ) = Y0N β is the expectation

value of the approximately log-normally distributed stochastic variable, Y , for a city, given its

population size, N , or (cid:104)Y (cid:105)|N = Y0N β [35].

The decomposition of any urban measurable into two components, an expected value as a

function of city size (scaling relation) and a local deviation ξ, resolves the tension between what

is general and what is particular, respectively, about each city within an urban system. Because

of these properties, the values of ξ have been proposed and used as population size independent

urban indicators to characterize the individual performance of each city relative to each other

within an urban system [22, 36]. If the dispersion (the variance, σ2

ξ ) is larger for a given urban

system or a speciﬁc quantity, then the scaling relation (average expectation) is less predictive

of the properties of such cities, and vice versa. We will see some examples of both situations

below.

Empirical analyses of the scaling relations for many urban systems have suggested that there

are consistent agglomeration effects [37, 25, 17, 35, 19] across city size in many urban systems,

including Germany, China, Japan, the US and Brazil. This translates into expectations for spe-

ciﬁc values of the exponents, β, for different urban quantities. To calculate the expected value

of these exponents, and of other associated quantities, urban scaling theory proposes a self-

consistent model of socioeconomic networks embedded in urban built space as decentralized

infrastructure networks [19]. To achieve this, it builds on a long history of earlier quantitative

models [38, 39, 11] to describe a city functionally as a spatial equilibrium whose extent is set by

7

the balance of density dependent socioeconomic interactions (centripetal forces) and transporta-

tion costs (centrifugal forces)[19]. This approach emphasizes the critical importance of using

a functional deﬁnition of cities for empirical examinations of urban scaling: It is only for units

of analysis that embody this global spatial equilibrium that the values of β for many different

urban quantities are calculated via urban scaling theory. For other plausible urban units, such as

political or administrative cities of various kinds (e.g. municipalities, counties, etc), there are at

present, to the best of our knowledge, no predictions for the corresponding values of β, which

may or may not appear consistent [40].

For these reasons, we consider only functional cities (metropolitan areas), which are the

natural deﬁnition of cities as socioeconomic systems. We will not repeat the derivations for

the values of β here and merely restate the expectations for the exponents associated with eco-

nomic performance, innovation, the volume of built infrastructure and employment, which we

will contrast to data below. We have that all socioeconomic quantities (GDP, innovation) are

expected to take the same exponent [19], resulting in

βsocioeconomic = 1 + δ, βbuilt−infrastructure = 1 − δ, βemployment = 1, δ =

H
2(H + 2)

,

(3)

where 2 ≥ H ≥ 0 is a fractal dimension of individual movement within the city and describes

aggregate socioeconomic interaction opportunities. As H → 0 individuals experience cities

only from their circumscribed location, social interactions cease and the city becomes spatially

segregated. As a consequence, all agglomeration effects vanish, δ → 0. In this limit, population

densities or economic performance are independent of city size and indeed the advantages of

urban life disappear. Thus, as H → 0, cities should cease to exist, as the forces that hold them

together vanish. Conversely, as H → 2, individuals use the entire space of the city, which

may be appropriate to describe central areas, but not the city as a whole. As H ≥ 1 the city is

fully mixing, which can be achieved at minimal movement costs for H = 1. Thus, H (cid:39) 1 is

8

hypothesized to be the most likely exponent [19], corresponding to the simplest scenario with

βsocioeconomic =

7
6

,

βbuilt−infrastructure =

5
6

,

βemployment = 1,

δ =

1
6

.

(4)

This scenario is so simple, in fact, that it can only be expected to hold very approximately:

some level of spatial, social and economic segregation always exists, and so does the opportu-

nity to visit the city more extensively, especially if more accessible transportation options are

available. Nevertheless, we will use these values of β as null models and see that these simplest

expectations hold surprisingly well for modern Europe, especially in the aggregate.

2.2 Urban Scaling Properties in Five European Nations

We proceed by analyzing the general properties of European metropolitan areas (MAs) for the

largest ﬁve urban system in Western Europe. These are some of the oldest urban systems in the

world. All ﬁve urban system have long roots in history, dating back to Roman times in some

cases (Italy, France, parts of Britain) and the medieval period for most (i.e., Germany), and

persisting through much change and transformation [8, 9]. The UK’s urban system was the ﬁrst

in the world to undergo the industrial revolution with well known consequences for the growth

of its cities and the change in the living conditions of its inhabitants [8, 9]. France and Germany

followed suit shortly thereafter. In addition, these ﬁve urban systems have experienced very

different levels of political and economic uniﬁcation, with Italy and Germany being uniﬁed

relatively recently and Germany being subsequently separated into East and West at the end of

World War II. Finally, over the last few decades all these nations have become integrated as

part of the European Union and granted free circulation of people (citizens) and capital. For all

these reasons we may expect all ﬁve different urban systems to exhibit different properties.

France

France has one of the oldest politically and economically integrated urban systems in Eu-

9

rope [41, 42]. Figure 1 shows the scaling behavior of all 15 cities in France with population

above 500,000 people, for urban GDP, urbanized area, employment and patents.

Urban scaling theory predicts superlinear behavior β > 1 for socioeconomic quantities

(GDP, patents), linear behavior for characteristics closely tied to population, such as employ-

ment (β = 1), and sublinear behavior for urbanized area (β < 1), expressing greater average

densities in larger cities. All three trends are observed for the French urban system with small

statistical dispersion (deviations, ξ (cid:54)= 0), with the exception of patents, which is always a noisy

quantity [43], Fig. 1D. The estimation results obtained using OLS regression on logarithmic

variables produces scaling exponents that agree quantitatively with the simplest predictions

from urban scaling theory. Unfortunately, the small sample size does not allow very precise

exponent measurements and conﬁdence intervals remain broad (but clearly super/sublinear as

expected), especially for patents, Table 1. We will address this issue below, after seeing the

problem recur for other European urban systems.

Regarding exceptions, the cities of France are exceedingly well behaved and deviations

from their average scaling relation are not strong. Nevertheless, Fig. 1A for GDP reveals that

cities such as Marseille and Lille have smaller economies than it would have been expected for

their population size. Most cities in France also have an extent of urbanized area that is very

consistent with a nation-wide scaling trend; a slight exception is Bordeaux that appears larger

than expected for its population. Fig. 1C shows that Lille, again, and Montpellier have lower

employment than expected, a situation related to their former status as manufacturing centers.

Finally, Fig. 1D expresses well known qualitative expectations that technological innovation is

an important feature of French cities such as Grenoble, Toulouse and even Lyon, while Toulon,

in Provence, show very little inventive activity.

United Kingdom

Analogous to France in many ways, Great Britain is also an old and fairly politically uniﬁed

10

Figure 1: The scaling of urban quantities with population size for Metropolitan Areas in France.
There are 15 functional urban areas in France with populations above 500,000 people, speciﬁ-
cally Paris, Lyon, Marseille, Toulouse, Strasbourg, Bordeaux, Nantes, Lille, Montpellier, Saint-
Etienne, Rennes, Grenoble, Toulon, Nice, and Rouen. Fig 1A show the results for GDP, show-
ing clear superlinear β > 1 scaling. Lines shows the best ﬁt (red, see Table 1, R2 = 0.98), the
simplest prediction from urban scaling theory (yellow) and a proportionality line (black) for the
absence of scaling effects. Fig. 1B shows the scaling of urbanized area (R2 = 0.92), Fig. 1C
the scaling of total Employment (R2 = 0.99) and Fig. 1D of patents (R2 = 0.43), as a proxy
for general rates of urban innovation. The results (red lines) are statistically indistinguishable
from the predictions of urban scaling (yellow lines) within conﬁdence intervals, but the precise
value of scaling exponents is hard to ascertain because of the small sample size and the level of
individual city variation.

11

β=1.204A.ParisLyonMarseilleLilleβ=0.852B.ParisBordeauxβ=1.025C.LilleMontpellierβ=1.201D.LyonToulouseGrenobleToulonurban system [44]. There are also 15 MAs in Great Britain with populations above 500.000.

These cities also exhibit tight scaling behavior with small deviations, Fig. 2. Exponent estimates

for GDP, urbanized area and employment agree with those of France and with the expectations

of urban scaling theory, but statistically suffer, again, from being a relatively small number

of cities. Both French and British urban systems show strong macrocephaly, with Paris and

London (the two largest cities in the European Union, with population 11.5M) being much

larger than secondary cities in each nation. This also means that Paris and London manifest

much stronger agglomeration (dis)advantages than any other cities in their national setting.

Some notable exceptions can nevertheless be identiﬁed. As is well documented, the former

large scale manufacturing centers of Birmingham and Manchester (the two largest cities in

Britain after London) show economies and levels of employment that are too small for their

population size. Edinburgh, the political capital Scotland, behaves in the opposite direction and

is richer than expected for a city of its size in the British context, Fig. 2B. Unfortunately, the

present OECD-EU data release does not provide number for patents produced in British cities.

This issue has been the focus of some empirical controversy [45, 40]. On a separate piece, we

show that British inventors ﬁle the majority of their patents in the United States, and that when

this is taken into account, strong agglomeration effects are observed. It will be important to

continue to understand the nature and magnitude of measures of innovation in British cities, as

there is often the perception that these activities have become too concentrated in London, but

see [46].

Spain

Spain is the smallest of the national urban systems analyzed here, with only 8 cities above

500,000 people, see Fig 3. Nevertheless, GDP, employment and patents scale as expected,

although with wider conﬁdence intervals, see Table 1. The urbanized area of Spanish cities

appears superlinear, contrary to theory, though with a very wide conﬁdence interval: this is

12

Figure 2: The scaling of urban quantities with population size for Metropolitan Areas in the
UK. There are 15 functional cities above 500,000 people in the dataset, speciﬁcally London,
Birmingham, Leeds, Bradford, Liverpool, Manchester, Cardiff, Shefﬁeld, Bristol, Newcastle,
Leicester, Portsmouth, Nottingham, Glasgow, and Edinburgh. Fig 1A show the results for GDP,
showing clear superlinear β > 1 scaling. Lines shows the best ﬁt (red, see Table 1,R2 = 0.92),
the simplest prediction from urban scaling theory (yellow) and a proportionality line (black) for
the absence of scaling effects. Fig. 1B shows the scaling of urbanized area (R2 = 0.98), Fig.
1C the scaling of total Employment (R2 = 0.99) and Fig. 1D the product of urbanized area per
capita times GDP per capita (R2 = 0.00), which is predicted by urban scaling theory to be city
size invariant as observed. We see that the best-ﬁt results (red lines) are in broad agreement with
urban scaling theory (yellow lines) and evidence from other urban systems, but that conﬁdence
intervals for parameters are wide because of the smallness of the data sample, Table 1.

13

β=1.123A.LondonBirminghamManchesterEdinburghβ=0.899B.LondonPortsmouthC.β=0.997β=0.023D.largely the result of the urbanized area for Madrid, which is very large, even in the context of

all large EU cities, as we shall see in greater detail below.

Figure 3: The scaling of urban quantities with population size for Metropolitan Areas in Spain.
There are only 8 functional cities above 500,000 people in the dataset, speciﬁcally Madrid,
Barcelona, Valencia, Seville, Zaragoza, Malaga, Las Palmas, Bilbao. Fig 1A show the results
for GDP, showing clear superlinear β > 1 scaling. Lines shows the best ﬁt (red, see Table
1, R2 = 0.94), the prediction from urban scaling theory (yellow) and a simple proportionality
line (black) for the absence of scaling effects. Fig. 1B shows the scaling of urbanized area
(R2 = 0.88), Fig. 1C the scaling of total Employment (R2 = 0.98) and Fig. 1D of patents
(R2 = 0.62), as a proxy for general rates of urban innovation. Because of the small number of
large cities in Spain, as well as individual and regional variations, the conﬁdence intervals on
exponents are particularly broad, Table 1.

Among such a small number of cities the speciﬁc characteristics of particular places be-

comes particularly important. We see that some of the cities of Spanish Southwest, such as

Seville and Malaga are poorer and less inventive than their national counterparts and that cities

14

MilanTurinβ=1.662D.BarcelonaMalagaZaragozaC.β=1.071SevilleMalagaβ=1.090B.MadridBilbaoLas PalmasLas Palmasβ=1.134A.BilbaoSevilleSevilleValenciasuch a as Barcelona and Zaragoza produce a number of patents much larger than Las Palmas

(Canary Islands), even when accounting for their respective population sizes. A small urban sys-

tem such as Spain’s thus allows only a very general comparison with expected agglomeration

effects because large uncertainties remain as to the value of average elasticities or exponents.

Italy

Much like Spain, but slightly larger, the urban system of Italy is comprised of 11 cities over

500,000 people, Fig. 4. The most striking feature of the Italian urban system are the differences

between the Northern and Southern regions of the country. Results agree generally with the

predictions of urban scaling theory but superlinear effects of GDP and patenting are a little lower

than expectations, although with very wide 95% conﬁdence intervals. This is partly because

Naples is a strong outlier along a number of dimensions:

it has a small GDP, employment

and number of patents for its population size and is also small in terms of its urbanized area.

Moreover, Naples is not alone and other Southern Italian cities - such as Palermo, Catania an

Bari – also underperform in term of GDP, levels of employment and patenting.

Germany

Finally, we turn to the scaling analysis of the German urban system, the largest of the ﬁve

European nations analyzed here with 24 urban areas of more than 500,000 people. Fig. 5A

shows the scaling of GDP for German Metropolitan Areas versus their population size. The

best ﬁt line agrees perfectly with the simplest prediction of urban scaling theory, Table 1, al-

though the East-West divide between the nation is also apparent, with Berlin, and to a lesser

extent Dresden and Leipzig standing out below the scaling line. Fig. 5B show the scaling of

urbanized area, with best ﬁt line sublinear but a little higher than urban scaling predicts. It

is important to note that the East-West divide is also visible here with Eastern cities showing

larger urbanized areas than expected. Employment shows a very predictable linear trend, with

the single exception of Bremen, which shows smaller number of jobs than expected, a well

15

Figure 4: The scaling of urban quantities with population size for Metropolitan Areas in Italy.
There are just 11 functional cities above 500,000 people in the dataset, speciﬁcally Rome, Mi-
lan, Naples, Turin, Palermo, Genova, Florence, Bari, Bologna, Catania, Venice. Fig 1A show
the results for GDP. Lines shows the best ﬁt (red, see Table 1, R2 = 0.78), the prediction from
urban scaling theory (yellow) and a simple proportionality line (black) for the absence of ag-
glomeration effects. Fig. 1B shows the scaling of urbanized area (R2 = 0.83), Fig. 1C the
scaling of total Employment (R2 = 0.89) and Fig. 1D of patents (R2 = 0.29), as a proxy for
general rates of urban innovation. The small number of large cities in Italy, compounded by the
strong North-South divide in development makes the Italian urban system far from regular from
the point of view of urban scaling, resulting in lower R2’s than for other nations and in broad
conﬁdence intervals for estimated exponents, Table 1.

16

NaplesMilanA.TurinRomePalermoFlorenceCataniaVeniceB.NaplesC.NaplesPalermoCataniaBariD.NaplesMilanTurinPalermoFlorenceRomeβ=1.083β=0.857β=1.017β=1.064documented phenomenon after the decline of its shipyards and other related industries [47].

Finally, the trend for patents is quite noisy, but shows well-known technology centers such as

Munich, Stuttgart and Mannheim as strong positive outliers, while Leipzig and Bremen appear

as cities with low rates of invention.

It is noteworthy that, despite strong regional and city-speciﬁc differences, the larger num-

ber of cities in Germany allows us to start establishing the superlinear character of GDP and

patenting, the strictly linear behavior of employment and the sublinear nature of urbanized area

with a little more statistical conﬁdence. The analysis of these ﬁve largest western European

urban systems shows, however, that given the typical statistical dispersion in the character of

each city, larger samples would be necessary to establish the actual values of scaling exponents

with sufﬁcient conﬁdence that some testing of theory can be performed. Such a test requires

therefore a larger number of European cities, an issue that we address in the next section.

Table 1: Summary Scaling Exponents for GDP, Urbanized Area, Employment and Patents for
European Metropolitan Areas versus population, see text and Figs. 1-7 for additional details.
Square brackets show 95% conﬁdence intervals on exponents.

Nation
France
UK
Spain
Italy
Germany
Europe

Nc
15
15
8
11
24
102

GDP
1.20 [1.15,1.26]
1.12 [1.00,1.25]
1.13 [0.97,1.30]
1.08 [0.82,1.35]
1.17 [1.06,1.28]
1.17 [1.11,1.22]

Urbanized Area
0.85 [0.75,0.95]
0.90 [0.85,0.95]
1.09 [0.86,1.32]
0.86 [0.68,1.04]
0.95 [0.84,1.06]
0.93 [0.88,0.98]

Employment
1.03 [0.98,1.07]
1.00 [0.97,1.02]
1.07 [0.99,1.16]
1.02 [0.85,1.18]
1.02 [0.98,1.07]
1.02 [1.00,1.05]

Patents
1.20 [0.72,1.69]
NA
1.66 [0.95,2.37]
1.07 [0.40,1.73]
1.30 [0.92,1.67]
1.13 [0.91,1.34]

2.3 The Pan-European Urban System

Estimating scaling parameters for relatively small urban systems, with less than a few dozen

large cities, is fraught with procedural difﬁculties and typically leads to large error bands. This

makes it difﬁcult to assess the consistency of scaling parameters across nations and over time,

17

Figure 5: Urban Scaling for Metropolitan Areas in Germany. There are 24 functional cities
above 500,000 people in the dataset, speciﬁcally Berlin, Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Frank-
furt, Stuttgart, Essen, Leipzig, Dresden, Dortmund, D¨usseldorf, Bremen, Hanover, Nurem-
berg, Bochum, Freiburg im Breisgau, Augsburg, Bonn, Karlsruhe, Saarbr¨ucken, Duisburg,
Mannheim, M¨unster, and Aachen. Fig 1A show the results for GDP, showing clear super-
linear β > 1 scaling. Lines shows the best ﬁt (red, see Table 1, R2 = 0.91), the prediction
from urban scaling theory (yellow) and a simple proportionality line (black) for the absence of
agglomeration effects. Fig. 1B shows the scaling of urbanized area (R2 = 0.86), Fig. 1C the
scaling of total Employment (R2 = 0.98) and Fig. 1D of patents (R2 = 0.47), as a proxy for
general rates of urban innovation. Despite the larger size of the German urban system, clear
differences between East-West are still visible, especially in the behavior of Berlin.

18

Berlinβ=1.167A.MunichLeipzigDresdenAachenB.β=0.945BerlinHamburgMunichStuttgartLeipzigDresdenFreiburgβ=1.024C.Bremenβ=1.295D.BerlinHamburgMunichStuttgartMannheimLeipzigBremenand permits only relatively weak conclusions. Fortunately, the simple mathematical form of

scaling relations provides us with a general method to pool data from across urban systems

that we expect a priori have different baseline quantities, such as greater/smaller wealth in

Germany/Spain. Besides being mathematically and econometrically justiﬁed, pooling the data

from the various national systems is also conceptually interesting, given the efforts at Euro-

pean integration via trade and ﬁnancial networks, and commonalities of legal, institutional and

technological frameworks. This procedure will allow us to discuss the extent of this integration

along several independent dimensions.

To see this, consider the general form of scaling relation as a power law. After taking

logarithms, we obtain

ln Yi = ln Y0 + β ln Ni + ξi.

The average of ln Yi over all cities, (cid:104)ln Y (cid:105), is

(cid:104)ln Y (cid:105) =

1
Nc

Nc(cid:88)

i=1

ln Yi = ln Y0 + β(cid:104)ln N (cid:105),

(5)

(6)

where Nc is the number of cities in a given urban system (nation) and where we have used the

fact that (cid:104)ξ(cid:105) = 0 for a well posed ﬁt.

Subtracting Eq. 6 from Eq. 5, we obtain

∆ ln Yi = β∆ ln Ni + ξi,

(7)

with and ∆ ln Ni = ln Ni − (cid:104)ln N (cid:105). This relationship is now a centered scaling relation. In

logarithmic scales, it is a straight line with slope β and coordinate at the origin pinned to zero.

Two different urban systems after centering share the same origin (0,0) in logarithmic axes and

can be superposed. Thus, the centered scaling relation is a one-parameter model that can be

used to determine the scaling exponent in a way that excludes co-variations of the intercept and

exponent during estimation.

19

Using this procedure we can center variables from different urban systems onto the same

dataset and perform a global scaling analysis to estimate the overall scaling exponent β. Figure 6

show the result of this procedure using OECD-EU MAs for 12 European nations (102 cities).

This enlarged set of observations include, in addition to the urban systems analyzed above, cities

from Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Netherlands, Poland, Sweden and Switzerland. We

excluded urban system with 2 or fewer metropolitan areas, such as Portugal or Norway.

Fig. 6A shows the scaling relation for GDP across Europe. We ﬁnd perfect agreement

between urban scaling theory and the data using a one-parameter best ﬁt. For urbanized area

the ﬁt diverges somewhat, but the prediction of urban scaling theory (β = 5/6, no ﬁt) hits

precisely the area of both smaller and largest cities (Paris and London), which the ﬁt misses.

Agreements for employment and patents are also excellent.

We conclude that the pooled dataset for Europe shows good general agreement with urban

scaling theory and that the variability observed at the national level is a consequence of small

datasets and of the levels of typical variation in cities. In this way, we explicitly see how urban

scaling is an emergent property of functional cities that becomes visible statistically as more

cities are considered.

2.4 A European City with 50 million people? City size distributions and

scaling

We have just seen how data for different urban systems can be pooled together, after centering,

to provide a larger sample for which urban scaling effects can be empirically tested in a very

simple and robust way. In doing this, we normalized the data for each country by the average

logarithmic city size and indicator magnitude within the sample. Analyzing the magnitude of

these variables for each nation gives us a sense of their convergence or divergence within the

European system in terms of demographic characteristics and economic performance. Figure

20

7A shows the average logarithmic GDP and population for cities in the 12 European nations

pooled in Fig. 6.

As expected by construction, these points show no correlation between the two variables

and thus appear fairly scattered. A group of nations clusters together in the center, including

Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Sweden and the UK. These nations and their urban systems

appear more integrated than other outliers, such as Switzerland, the Czech Republic, Poland or

even Spain. Tracing a vertical line of approximate same average logarithmic population, we

cross, from bottom to top, France, the UK, Germany and the Netherlands. This means that with

the same average city size (but different distributions, as we discuss below), these nations have

cities with increasingly larger economies. In other words, the economy of the Netherlands uses

its urbanization much more efﬁciently to produce economic value than Germany’s, followed by

the UK and then by France.

An analogous argument can be developed along a horizontal line, tracing nations with the

same average economic performance per city but with different average city sizes. From left to

right, we see, roughly along the same horizontal line, Switzerland, Austria, Sweden, Germany,

and Spain. A slightly lower (poorer) horizontal line may include Belgium, the UK and Italy.

This shows that Switzerland requires smaller cities to achieve the same economic performance

of, say, Germany, and that Spain is able to belong to this club by having larger cities, that is, by

further exploring the economic magniﬁcation effects of superlinear scaling.

Thus, the path to a richer nation overall depends on two important but uncorrelated dynam-

ics: baseline productivity per person in cities and city sizes. Nations with lower productivity can

nevertheless become wealthy as a whole by growing their cities larger, currently a worldwide

phenomenon [48], whereas nations with high productivity can be rich even while having rela-

tively small cities [49]. Spain or Poland already have large cities but could do well to increase

their baseline productivity; Switzerland or the Netherlands could become even richer simply by

21

Figure 6: The scaling of urban quantities with population size for Metropolitan Areas in Europe.
These data include all urban systems in the EU and Switzerland with more than two cities above
500,000 people. This amounts to 102 functional cities in 12 nations: Austria, Belgium, the
Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom. Because the data have been centered in each nation (see text) the expected
scaling relation has intercept zero in a logarithmic plot. We have taken the simplest prediction of
urban scaling theory, that the superlinear scaling exponent for socioeconomic quantities (GDP
and patents) is β = 7/6, that for infrastructural networks and built space (urbanized area) the
sublinear exponent is β = 5/6, and that for individual needs (employment) it is linear β = 1
(yellow lines). With these choices there are no free parameters and a direct test of urban scaling
can be performed without statistical uncertainties arising from best ﬁts in small data samples.
Fig. 6A show the results for GDP and a nearly exact agreement with theory (best ﬁt, R2 = 0.90),
Table 1. Fig. 6B show the results for urbanized area, the best ﬁt gives a slightly larger β than
predicted by theory (red line, R2 = 0.88) but fails to describe London and Paris. Urban scaling
(yellow line) ﬁts most of the data well and correctly predicts the urbanized area of London and
Paris. Employment, Fig. 6C, is also linear as expected (R2 = 0.97). Finally, patents in Fig. 6D
are noisier as this quantity is quite variable across cities and nations, but the best ﬁt (red line,
R2 = 0.30) and prediction from urban scaling theory (yellow line) are statistically consistent
and, in particular, predict well innovation rates for London and Paris. Data for patents is not
provided for the UK and is inconsistent for Poland, so that these two nations were excluded
from the analysis of Fig. 1D.

22

BerlinA.NaplesMilanParisLondonB.NaplesMadridC.NaplesD.NaplesLas PalmasEindhovengrowing their cities further.

This brings us to the issue of city size distributions for different European nations. This is

usually summarized by Zipf’s law (or rank-size rule) for the size distribution of cities [50, 51].

Fig. 7B shows the counter-cumulative normalized frequency distribution, P (N ≥ x), for the

ﬁve largest nations in the EU analyzed above. Expressed in this way Zipf’s law is simply,

P (N ≥ x) = Nmin/x, where Nmin is the smallest city size in the data set.

Figure 7: The average logarithm GDP and Population size of cities in different national urban
systems in Europe and their city size distributions. A. The average logarithmic GDP and city
size across cities in each nation. These are the values used to center the data in Fig. 6. We
see no correlation, as expected, but observe that different nations are characterized by different
average city sizes and GDP magnitudes, see text for discussion. B. The distribution of relative
city sizes, P (x ≥ N ), for France (blue), Germany (orange), Italy (green), Spain (yellow) and
the UK (red), and for the EU, inset (112 cities ≥ 500,000 people). We observe that none of the
largest Western European Urban systems follows Zipf’s law (solid lines): Germany lacks large
enough cities; France and the UK are remarkably similar and are characterized by one very
large city (Paris, London) and a set of secondary cities that are too small. When all the cities
in the dataset are pooled together we ﬁnd (inset) that Zipf’s law (red line) is a poor descriptor
of the size distribution of city sizes across the EU in the sense that Europe lacks large enough
cities. This issue is explored in section 2.4, where we derive the expected size of the largest city
in Europe from Zipf’s law (58 million!) and predict its GDP, land area and patent production
from urban scaling.

None of these ﬁve nations shows a city size distribution in good agreement with Zipf’s law,

23

PolandNetherlandsCzech RepublicSwitzerlandAustriaBelgiumSwedenGermanySpainItalyUKFranceAverage Log City PopulationNormalized City SizeP(x>N)P(x>N)Average Log City GDPNormalized City SizeA.B.Fig. 7. Although there is some initial agreement for the smallest cities, France and the UK are

very similar in that they have one enormous city (Paris and London, respectively) and secondary

large cities that are too small by Zipf law’s expectation. Germany lacks large cities; Italy is very

scattered. Spain is perhaps the urban system with the best agreement, but it is small and its two

largest cities (Madrid and Barcelona) are too big compared with the Zipﬁan expectation. The

inset in Fig. 7B show the same distribution for all cities in Europe in the OECD-EC dataset

(112 cities). We see that if we took Europe as an integrated urban system then its large cities

are all too small and the Zipﬁan expectation fails to work at the pan-European level either. We

conclude that Zipf’s law, one of the oldest empirical regularities for cities, fails to give us any

consistent expectation for the ”right’ sizes of European cities, either at the national level or in

the aggregate.

The disagreement between Zipf’s law for the UK (or France) could lead us to conclude, for

example, that London (Paris) is too large, too expensive and too destabilizing of other cities in

the UK (France), a phenomenon that policy should actively address [52, 53]. However, urban

scaling tells us instead that London and Paris are not at all ”anomalous”. Shrinking London (or

Paris), by moving population to other smaller cities, would make the UK (or France) poorer as a

whole because London is the main way in which the nation explores the economic multiplicative

effects of urban agglomeration. This is probably unacceptable and anathema to the spirit of the

policies developed to improve the UK’s urban system. Other scenarios that would make the UK

(France) richer, would need to rely instead on moving population up the urban hierarchy, from

smaller towns to mid-sized cities. Another, harder path, would attempt to replicate the Swiss or

Dutch model and create a larger baseline productivity that allows all cities to do better without

requiring demographic growth. For Germany, the path for larger wealth may have to do with

growing its big cities larger, which, at least in the case of Berlin, remains a work in progress

after the events of the 20th century that curbed its early explosive growth.

24

We ﬁnish this section with a set of conjectures for the implications of Zipf’s law for Europe

as a whole. According to Zipf’s law, and the empirical baselines of Figure 7 (inset), we can

calculate that the largest city in the EU should have a population of 58 million, the second 29

million, the third about 19 million and so on. The ﬁfth largest city would be roughly the size of

today’s Paris or London, with 11.5M people. Using urban scaling, we can compute the GDP,

urbanized area, patent production and many more quantities [19] for these hypothetical cities.

The GDP of such largest city would be 6.5 times larger than that of Paris or London today,

which corresponds to an increase of 30% per capita in these cities. A similar increase in density

in these cities (decrease in urbanized area per capita) would also be expected, but note that this

would result in a density for Paris of about 26,000 people/km2, still much lower than earlier

20th century densities and than some of the most exciting parts of Paris (presently, the 11th

arrondissement is the densest in Paris with a population density of 40,000 people/km2).

Creating such cities in Europe through the vigorous growth of Paris, London, Berlin, Madrid,

Milan and others to such enormous sizes may certainly have its drawbacks. Continued urban

system integration at the pan-European level is all but certain to grow these population centers

disproportionately, further increasing inequalities between richer and poorer regions in Europe.

But, at the same time, it would create a truly international culture in Europe, beyond today’s

heritage of older nationalisms and unleash massive technological and economic growth of the

kind most European nations can currently only dream of.

3 Discussion

We have analyzed the scaling properties of European Metropolitan Areas, deﬁned by the most

recent joint effort by the OECD-EU to create harmonized functional cities [29]. Arguably, these

functional urban units constitute the best consistent deﬁnition of socioeconomic cities in Europe

constructed to date and allow for improved comparative analyses of urban properties throughout

25

Europe and beyond. Using these spatial units, we ﬁnd support for the quantitative predictions of

urban scaling theory regarding scaling exponents, especially for France and the UK and in the

aggregate of EU nations. This shows that urban scaling with the speciﬁc elasticities (exponents)

discussed here is exhibited by urban systems whose constituent units are indeed functional ur-

ban units, even in Europe. Other plausible urban units of analysis (such as political cities) are

likely poorer approximations to cities as socioeconomic units and should be expected to exhibit

different elasticities or, possibly, no clear scaling at all [40]. By using units of analysis whose

spatial delineations actually capture urban functionality, the British urban system and especially

France, are shown to exhibit expected scaling behavior, despite many historical and contempo-

rary peculiarities [45]. There is also broad empirical agreement between the scaling patterns of

European MAs and the properties of other large urban systems, such as the United States, China

or Brazil [17, 18]. The current OECD-EU dataset covers urban areas with populations larger

than 500,000 people so it will be interesting to explore in future analyses smaller harmonized

functional cities. Given the density and compactness of many European regions these spatial

units may in many cases be difﬁcult to deﬁne unambiguously.

Despite the effort and the rationale involved in this most recent deﬁnition of functional cities

in Europe, it should be expected that such deﬁnitions will continue to be improved in the future

and we look forward to revisiting our empirical ﬁndings at such times. Urban scaling analysis

provides a general simple expectation for many of the properties of a city in relation to its

urban system and, as a consequence, it constitutes a means to identify places with exceptional

properties, good and bad. Such deviations can be the result of true local exceptionality or of data

issues. Our analysis ﬂags a number of European MAs as exceptional, in their regional context

and in Europe at large. The strongest deviations from scaling for GDP are observed for Naples,

Italy and for Berlin, Germany. In both cases these cities are either too large in population for

their economic performance, or have economies that are too small for their populations. Berlin,

26

and other former East Germany cities, having endured the ravages of WWII and the cold war,

still tend to underperform compared to their their West German counterparts. But Berlin, given

its history and recent policy interventions, clearly stands on its own as a particular case. It would

be interesting to analyze the sensitivity of the economic performance for these cities versus their

spatial deﬁnitions further and to follow their temporal evolution closely. Similarly, and possibly

related, the urbanized area of Naples appears too small and that of Madrid, Spain too large. In

this way, urban scaling analysis, can be used to point the way towards better quantitative and

systematic understanding of the exceptionality of speciﬁc places and for better understanding

their speciﬁc contingencies and histories from a quantitative perspective.

On the strength of the results presented here and those from previous studies of other con-

temporary and older urban systems, we can conclude that urban scaling is a stronger statistical

regularity for functional cities than the rank-size distribution of city size, also known as Zipf’s

law. Indeed different European nations show very different rank-size distributions, with e.g.

France or the UK showing strong primacy (as Paris and London are 4-5 times larger than the

second largest city) whereas in Germany, Spain, or Italy the opposite is true and several large

cities co-exist. Despite these well known and very variable patterns in the size distribution of

cities, agglomeration effects and the resulting scaling relations persist with greater regularity

in each system and especially in the analysis that pools all nations in Europe together. From

the perspective of urban scaling, London or Paris are not exceptional cities at all. Rather, their

properties are just what one should expect for a British or French city of their population size.

Thus, it will be interesting to continue to develop urban theory that brings together the theoreti-

cal insights behind scaling and agglomeration effects with those that predict the size distribution

of cities.

Today, Europe remains a less urbanized continent than North America or developed Asia,

with an overall urbanization rate of about 70%. Paris and London are growing slowly, with

27

annual growth rates of 0.68% and 1.18%, respectively, typical of most EU cities. Madrid is

Western Europe’s fastest growing large city with an annual growth rate of 1.8% [29]. At this

pace, London would double its population in 61 years, Paris in 106, and Madrid in 40 years.

As a thought experiment, we extrapolated the expectations of Zipf’s law for the size of the

largest cities in the European Union to predict a city with population above 50M people and a

number of other very large pan-european megacities. Using urban scaling theory, we predicted

(conservatively, in the absence of additional economic growth) that such a city would be an eco-

nomic colossus, with a GDP and invention rate per capita 30% larger than those of Paris and

London today. Thus, the rise of pan-european megacities would create tremendous magniﬁca-

tion effects to wealth creation and technological invention that would keep Europe on par with

other large and fast developing nations, such as the US, Japan, and future developed versions

of China and India. Such massive transformations of Europe’s urban system would, however,

also severely exacerbate regional inequalities by further amplifying the wealth, technology and

organizational sophistication of the richest areas of Europe today.

Acknowledgements

We thank Deborah Strumsky for discussions and Daniel Sanchez Serra for clariﬁcations of the

OECD-EU deﬁnitions of harmonized functional cities. This work was partially funded by the

MacArthur Foundation (grant 13-105749-000-USP) and the Army Research Ofﬁce Minerva

program (Grant W911NF1210097). We also thank the Arizona State University/Santa Fe Insti-

tute Center for Biosocial Complex Systems for support.

References and Notes

[1] Pirenne, H. & Halsey, F. D. Medieval cities; their origins and the revival of trade (Prince-

ton Univ. Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1980).

28

[2] Braudel, F. Civilization and capitalism, 15th-18th century (University of California Press,

Berkeley, 1992).

[3] De Vries, J. d. & Vries, J. European urbanisation: 1500 - 1800 (Routledge, London,

2013).

[4] Bairoch, P. Cities and economic development: from the dawn of history to the present

(Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1991).

[5] Abu-Lughod, J. L. Before European hegemony: the world system A. D. 1250 - 1350

(Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1991).

[6] Nicholas, D. The growth of the medieval city: from late antiquity to the early fourteenth

century. A history of urban society in Europe (Longman, London ; New York, 1997).

[7] Bowman, A. K. & Wilson, A. (eds.) Settlement, urbanization, and population. Oxford

studies on the Roman economy (Oxford University Press, Oxford ; New York, 2011).

[8] Hall, P. Cities in civilization (Pantheon Books, New York, 1998).

[9] Mumford, L. The city in history: its origins, its transformations, and its prospects (Har-

court, New York, 1989).

[10] Henderson, J. V. Urban development: theory, fact, and illusion (Oxford Univ. Press, New

York, 1991).

[11] Fujita, M., Krugman, P. R. & Venables, A. J. The spatial economy: cities, regions, and

international trade (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2001).

[12] Glaeser, E. L. Triumph of the city: how our greatest invention makes us richer, smarter,

greener, healthier, and happier (Penguin Books, New York, NY, 2012).

29

[13] Isard, W. Location and space-economy: a general theory relating to industrial location,

market areas, land use, trade, and urban structure. No. 1 in The regional science studies

series (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1972).

[14] Batty, M. The Size, Scale, and Shape of Cities. Science 319, 769–771 (2008). URL

http://www.sciencemag.org/content/319/5864/769.

[15] Storper, M. Keys to the city: how economics, institutions, social interactions, and politics

shape development (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2013).

[16] Kennedy, C. M. The evolution of great world cities: urban wealth and economic growth

(University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 2011).

[17] Bettencourt, L. M. A., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., Khnert, C. & West, G. B. Growth, innovation,

scaling, and the pace of life in cities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

104, 7301–7306 (2007). URL http://www.pnas.org/content/104/17/7301.

[18] Bettencourt, L. M. A., Lobo, J. & Youn, H. The hypothesis of urban scaling: formaliza-

tion, implications and challenges. arXiv:1301.5919 [nlin, physics:physics] (2013). URL

http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.5919. ArXiv: 1301.5919.

[19] Bettencourt, L. M. A. The Origins of Scaling in Cities. Science 340, 1438–1441 (2013).

URL http://www.sciencemag.org/content/340/6139/1438.

[20] Duranton, G. & Puga, D. Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies. In Hand-

book of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4, 2063–2117 (Elsevier, 2004). URL http:

//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1574008004800051.

30

[21] Barenblatt, G. I. Scaling, self-similarity, and intermediate asymptotics. No. 14 in Cam-

bridge texts in applied mathematics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge ; New York,

1996).

[22] Bettencourt, L. M. A., Lobo, J., Strumsky, D. & West, G. B. Urban Scaling and Its

Deviations: Revealing the Structure of Wealth, Innovation and Crime across Cities. PLoS

ONE 5, e13541 (2010). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.

0013541.

[23] Pred, A. City systems in advanced economies: past growth, present processes, and future

development options (Wiley, New York, 1977).

[24] Glaeser, E. L., Scheinkman, J. & Shleifer, A. Economic growth in a cross-section of cities.

Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 117–143 (1995). URL http://linkinghub.

elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0304393295012062.

[25] Ciccone, A. Agglomeration effects in Europe. European Economic Review 2, 213–227

(2002).

URL https://www.infona.pl//resource/bwmeta1.element.

elsevier-bae9ce0f-88d0-3b46-919c-a488d4460b60.

[26] Rice, P., Venables, A. J. & Patacchini, E. Spatial determinants of productivity: Anal-

ysis for the regions of Great Britain. Regional Science and Urban Economics 36,

727–752 (2006). URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/

S0166046206000305.

[27] Patacchini, E. Local analysis of economic disparities in Italy: a spatial statistics ap-

proach. Statistical Methods and Applications 17, 85–112 (2008). URL http://link.

springer.com/10.1007/s10260-007-0054-8.

31

[28] van Raan, A. F. J., van der Meulen, G. & Goedhart, W. Urban Scaling of Cities in the

Netherlands. arXiv:1503.04795 [nlin, physics:physics] (2015). URL http://arxiv.

org/abs/1503.04795. ArXiv: 1503.04795.

[29] OECD (ed.) Redeﬁning ”urban”: a new way to measure metropolitan areas (OECD, Paris,

2012).

[30] Woude, A. M. v. d., Hayami, A., De Vries, J. & International Union for the Scientiﬁc

Study of Population (eds.) Urbanization in history: a process of dynamic interactions.

International studies in demography (Clarendon Press ; Oxford University Press, Oxford

[England] : New York, 1990).

[31] Pan, W., Ghoshal, G., Krumme, C., Cebrian, M. & Pentland, A. Urban characteristics

attributable to density-driven tie formation. Nature Communications 4 (2013). URL

http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/ncomms2961.

[32] Sim, A., Yaliraki, S. N., Barahona, M. & Stumpf, M. P. H.

Great

cities

look small.

Journal of The Royal Society Interface 12, 20150315

(2015). URL http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/lookup/doi/

10.1098/rsif.2015.0315.

[33] Ortman, S. G., Cabaniss, A. H. F., Sturm, J. O. & Bettencourt, L. M. A. The Pre-History

of Urban Scaling. PLoS ONE 9, e87902 (2014). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.

1371/journal.pone.0087902.

[34] Ortman, S. G., Cabaniss, A. H. F., Sturm, J. O. & Bettencourt, L. M. A. Settlement scaling

and increasing returns in an ancient society. Science Advances 1, e1400066 (2015). URL

http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/1/1/e1400066.

32

[35] Gomez-Lievano, A., Youn, H. & Bettencourt, L. M. A. The Statistics of Urban Scaling

and Their Connection to Zipfs Law. PLoS ONE 7, e40393 (2012). URL http://dx.

doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0040393.

[36] Alves, L. G. A., Mendes, R. S., Lenzi, E. K. & Ribeiro, H. V. Scale-adjusted metrics

for predicting the evolution of urban indicators and quantifying the performance of cities.

arXiv:1507.05204 [physics] (2015). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1507.05204.

ArXiv: 1507.05204.

[37] Rosenthal, S. S. & Strange, W. C. Chapter 49 Evidence on the nature and sources of

agglomeration economies. In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4, 2119–

2171 (Elsevier, 2004). URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/

pii/S1574008004800063.

[38] Alonso, W. Location and land use: toward a general theory of land rent (Harvard Univ.

Press, Cambridge/Mass, 1977).

[39] Black, D. & Henderson, V. A Theory of Urban Growth. Journal of Political Economy

107, 252 (1999). URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/250060.

[40] Louf, R. & Barthelemy, M. Scaling:

lost in the smog. Environment and Planning

B: Planning and Design 41, 767–769 (2014). URL http://www.envplan.com/

abstract.cgi?id=b4105c.

[41] Sjoberg, G. The preindustrial city: past and present (Free Press, New York, 1965).

[42] Gies, J. & Gies, F. Life in a medieval city (Harper Perennial, New York, 1969).

[43] Bettencourt, L. M., Lobo, J. & Strumsky, D.

Invention in the city:

Increasing re-

turns to patenting as a scaling function of metropolitan size. Research Policy 36,

33

107–120 (2007). URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/

S0048733306001661.

[44] Nicholas, D. The later medieval city, 1300-1500. A history of urban society in Europe

(Longman, London ; New York, 1997).

[45] Arcaute, E. et al.

Constructing cities, deconstructing scaling laws.

Journal of

The Royal Society Interface 12, 20140745–20140745 (2014). URL http://rsif.

royalsocietypublishing.org/cgi/doi/10.1098/rsif.2014.0745.

[46] Clifton, N. The ”Creative Class” in the UK: An Initial Analysis. Geograﬁska Annaler,

Series B: Human Geography 90, 63–82 (2008). URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.

1111/j.1468-0467.2008.00276.x.

[47] Pl¨oger, J. Bremen city report. Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion CASEre-

port 39 (2007). URL http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/3623/1/Bremen_city_

report_(final).pdf.

[48] Bloom, D. E., Canning, D. & Fink, G. Urbanization and the Wealth of Nations.

Science 319, 772–775 (2008). URL http://www.sciencemag.org/content/

319/5864/772.

[49] Urban world: Mapping the economic power of cities | McKinsey & Company. URL

http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/urbanization/urban_world.

[50] Zipf, G. K. Human behavior and the principle of least effort: an introduction to human

ecology (Martino Pub., Mansﬁeld Centre, CT, 2012).

34

[51] Gabaix, X. Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics

114, 739–767 (1999). URL http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/doi/10.

1162/003355399556133.

[52] Champion, T. & Townsend, A. Great Britain’s second-order city regions in recessions. En-

vironment and Planning A 45, 362–382 (2013). URL http://www.envplan.com/

abstract.cgi?id=a45100.

[53] Champion, T., Coombes, M. & Gordon, I. How Far do England’s Second-Order Cities

Emulate London as Human-Capital Escalators? Population, Space and Place 20, 421–

433 (2014). URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/psp.1806.

35

