 A Probabilistic Embedding Clustering Method for Urban Structure Detection 

Xin Lina,b, Haifeng Lib＊, Yan Zhangb, Lei Gaob, Ling Zhaob, Min Dengb 

a School of Civil Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China 
b School of Geosciences and info-physics, Central South University, Changsha, China 

Commission IV, WG IV/3 

KEY WORDS: Urban Structure, Embedding, Clustering Method, Probabilistic Model, Feature Representation 

ABSTRACT: 

Urban structure detection is a basic task in urban geography. Clustering is a core technology to detect the patterns of urban spatial 
structure,  urban  functional  region,  and  so  on.  In  big  data  era,  diverse  urban  sensing  datasets  recording  information  like  human 
behaviour and human social activity, suffer from complexity in high dimension and high noise. And unfortunately, the state-of-the-
art  clustering  methods  does  not  handle  the  problem  with  high  dimension  and  high  noise  issues  concurrently.  In  this  paper,  a 
probabilistic embedding clustering method is proposed. Firstly, we come up with a Probabilistic Embedding Model (PEM) to find 
latent features from high dimensional urban sensing data by “learning” via probabilistic model. By latent features, we could  catch 
essential features hidden in high dimensional data known as  patterns; with the probabilistic model, we can also reduce uncertainty 
caused  by  high  noise.  Secondly,  through  tuning  the  parameters,  our  model  could  discover  two  kinds  of  urban  structure,  the 
homophily and structural equivalence, which means communities with intensive interaction or in the same roles in urban structure. 
We  evaluated  the  performance  of  our  model  by  conducting  experiments  on  real-world  data  and  experiments  with  real  data  in 
Shanghai (China) proved that our method could discover two  kinds  of  urban  structure,  the  homophily  and  structural  equivalence, 
which means clustering community with intensive interaction or under the same roles in urban space. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Urban  structure  detection  is  a  basic  task  in  urban  geography, 
beneficial  to  urban  planning,  government  management  and  so 
on  (Bourne,  1963).  In  big  data  era,  there  are  diverse  urban 
sensing  data  to  describe  the  city  on  different  preservatives. 
Those data help us analysis and understand the process of urban 
structure  in  some  aspects,  such  as  urban  functional  regions 
(Yuan  et  al.,  2012),  socioeconomic  environment  (Liu  et  al., 
2015),  and  sentiment  computing  (Xue  et  al.,  2014).  How  to 
uncover  the  urban  structures  and  discover  patterns  behind 
massive human behave data in unbans is vital. Clustering is one 
of core technique which utilizes the similarity between samples 
in a dense and short representation. 

From a large body of clustering techniques (spectral  clustering 
method (Luxburg, 2007; Ng et al., 2001), hierarchical clustering 
method (Rokach and Maimon, 2005), Fuzzy Clustering (Bezdek 
et  al.,  1984;  Gustafson  and  Kessel,  1978),  self-organization 
mapping  (Kohonen  and  Honkela,  2007),  etc.),  it  derives  many 
relative  works  in  urban  structure  exploration.  For  example, 
spectral clustering has already been used with success in urban 
land  segmentation  with  social  media  data  (Frias-Martinez  and 
Frias-Martinez,  2014;  Noulas  et  al.,  2011);  Hierarchical 
clustering  method  has  been  adopted  to  model  urban  structure 
with commuting flow data (Fusco and Caglioni, 2011); Google 
word2vec  model  also  has  been  utilized  to  discover  spatial 
distribution of urban land use with the data of points of interest 
(POI) (Yao et al., 2016). 

However,  some  of  the  state-of-the-art  clustering  methods  are 
expensive  for  large  real-world  networks  since  they  invlove 

＊ Corresponding author: lihaifeng@csu.edu.cn 

eigendecomposition  of  the  appropriate  data  matrix.  Secondly, 
most  of  the  methods  rely  on  a  rigid  notion  of  a  network 
neighbourhood,  which  fails  to  allow  a  flexible  algorithm  for  a 
network  mixed  by  complex  structures  (Tang  and  Liu,  2011). 
Moreover,  the  noise  in  real-world  data  calls  for  a  robust 
algorithm.  Consequently,  facing 
the  complexity  in  high-
dimensional data, the key problem is how to find a compact and 
expressive  feature,  i.e.  an  embedding  representation  in  low 
dimension  feature  space  from  a  high-dimensional  data  space. 
And the approach needs to be flexible and robust. 

In this paper, we proposed a probabilistic embedding clustering 
method  to  meet  the  need.  Our  contributions  are  listed  as 
following.  

Firstly,  we  proposed  a  Probabilistic  Embedding  Model  (PEM) 
to  learn  embedded  representation  of  high  dimensional  urban 
sensing  data.  With  the  probabilistic  model,  we  can  reduce 
uncertainty caused by high noise and high dimension. Then, by 
the  representations,  we  do  clustering  and  could  catch  essential 
features hidden in the data known as patterns of urban structure. 

Secondly,  our  model  could  discover  two  kinds  of  urban 
structures,  the  homophily  (Fortunato  and  Santo,  2010;  Hoff  et 
al.,  2002)  and  structural  equivalence  (Henderson  et  al.,  2012). 
The  homophily  contains  nodes  with  intensive  interaction  or 
belonging to similar communities, while structural  equivalence 
includes nodes having the same roles in urban structure.   

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  We  present  the 
details of our method in Section 2. In Section 3, we evaluate the 
clustering  performance  of  our  method  by  conducting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiments on real-world data, including parameter sensitivity 
and perturbation analysis. In Section 4, we carry on a case study 
in Shanghai as an example for the detection urban structure. In 
Section  5,  we  conclude  our  work  and  illuminated  some 
directions for future works. 

2.  PROBABILISTIC EMBEDDING  CLUSTERING  (PEC) 
METHOD 

In  this  section,  we  will  present  the  details  of  our  method,  the 
Probabilistic  Embedding  Clustering  (PEC)  Method.  PEC  is 
based on the algorithm, Node2vec (Grover and Leskovec, 2016), 
which is initiated to learn continuous feature representations for 
nodes  in  networks.  By  extending  the  meaning  of  networks 
(directed  and  weighted)  and  combining  with  a  clustering 
method, we have developed the node embedding method into a 
general  embedding-clustering  method  without  changing  its 
basic  idea.  There  are  three  components  of  PEC  method:  (1) 
Construction of Space Relation Graph (SRG), (2) Probabilistic 
Embedding  Model  (PEM),  (3)  Clustering.  We  would  discuss 
each of these in detail in the remaining part. 

2.1  Construction of Space Relation Graph (SRG) 

When recording the information of a city, we are used to divide 
the city into spatial parcels and the data stream is transformed to 
a set of arrays which describe the features of each parcel (Figure 
1(a)). As known, the features could be intrinsic properties, like 
the size, population, number of Point of Interests (POIs) and so 
on (Figure 1(b)), but also the interaction with other parcels, like 
orientation-destination  flow  (Figure  1(c)).  The  set  of  arrays  is 
called Urban Data  Matrix.  With  such  a  matrix,  we  aim  to  find 
urban structure. 

In  essence,  the  goal  requires  us  to  summarize  the  similarity  or 
dissimilarity among different parcels according to their features. 
Thus,  we  proposed  the  Space  Relation  Graph  (SRG).  In  the 
graph, each node presents the parcel of the  city  and  each  edge 
denotes  the  relationship  between  parcels.  As  the  features,  the 
relationship  could  represent  for  the  similarity  of  intrinsic 
properties  among  parcels  (SRG-I),  but  also  the  degree  of 
interaction among parcels (SRG-II). The only restriction is that 
the graph ought to be undirected. 

For  SRG-I,  we  measure  the  similarity  by  pairwise  distance  or 
other  similarity  function,  such  as  Euclidean  distance,  cosine 
distance  or  Gaussian  similarity  function.  While  for  SRG-II, 
since it is naturally a network, we simply normalize the pairwise 
interaction volume as the weight of edges. 

2.2  Probabilistic 
Hyperparameters 

Embedding  Model 

(PEM)  & 

After  obtaining  SRG,  we  learn  a  probabilistic  embedding 
representation (PER) for each node based on Node2vec(Grover 
and  Leskovec,  2016)  which  is  to  maximize  the  likelihood  of 
preserving  network  neighbourhoods  of  nodes  and  learn  a 
mapping  of  nodes  to  a  low-dimensional  space  for  obtaining 
feature  representations.  PER  is  such  a  feature  representation 
existing in a low-dimensional space for each node.  

The  basic  idea  of  PEM  is  utilizing  the  relationship  between  a 
node  and  the  neighbours  of  it  to  represent  the  node  itself.  A 
fundamental  hypothesis  is  the  representation  of  a  node  in  a 
network  should  be  decided  by  its  neighbourhood.    The  idea  is 
similar  to  the  Tobler’s  First  Law,  “Everything  is  related  to 

everything  else,  but  near  things  are  more  related  than  distant 
things”  (Tobler,  1970).  To  determine  the  neighborhood,  PEM 
uses  a  biased  random  walk  of  2nd  order  Markovian.  It  defines 
two  types  of  search  strategies,  the  breadth-first  search  (BFS) 
(Kurant  et  al.,  2010;  Skiena,  2008)  and  the  depth-first  search 
(DFS) (Tarjan, 1972). BFS samples immediate neighbors of the 
source  node  while  DFS  samples  neighbors  sequentially  at 
increasing  distances  from  the  source  node.  The  strategies  are 
controlled by hyperparameters p and q. 

Figure 1. Urban data matrix (a): information of parcels is stored 
in arrays and thus the urban data matrix is formed. There are 2 
types of urban data matrix. One is to describe intrinsic 
properties of parcels (b) and the other one is to describe the 
interaction among parcels (c). 

Given a source node t, and that the walk just sampled the node v 
as  the  neighbour  and  is  now  carrying  out  its  next  step,  the 
biased  random  walk  works  as  Figure  2  and  it  shows  how 
hyperparameters p and q drive the walk. 

Figure 2. Illustration of the biased 2nd random walk procedure 
in node2vec: It shows that how hyper-parameters p and q guide 
the walk between BFS and DFS. 

there 

Besides  the  hyperparameters,  there  are  also  other  global 
parameters  involved  in  the  random  walk  and  effective  in  the 
clustering  results  (Table  1).  Unfortunately, 
is  no 
systematic  study  investigating  the  effects  of  parameters  and 
hyperparameters  on  clustering  and  coming  up  with  well-
justified  rules  of  thumb.  As  a  general  recommendation,  we 
suggest to set p to a lower value and q to a higher value for BFS 
while set p to a higher value and q to a lower value for DFS. If 
you  want  to  balance  the  walk  between  BFS  and  DFS,  a  low  q 
and a low p (a high q and a high p) are recommended. When (p, 
q) = 1, the random walk is just driven by the weights in SRG. 
Other  parameters  are  suggested  to  be  set  higher  for  a  more 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
accurate clustering result. It would saturate around some values 
definitely  but  no  firm  theoretic  ground  is  proposed  towards 
various  networks.  All 
these  recommendations  would  be 
examined in Section 3. 

Parameters 

Definition 

d 

l 

r 

k 

Number  of  dimensions  of  the  embedding 
vector for feature representation. 

Walk length which determines the length of 
sampling from a source node. 

Number  of  walks  which  denotes  the  times 
of sampling from a source node. 

Neighbourhood size which restricts the size 
of neighbourhood. 

Table 1. Global parameters involved in the biased random walk: 
Setting them to higher values would help obtain a more accurate 
clustering result. 

2.3  Clustering 

We  use  k-means  algorithms  on  PER  to  get  final  results. 
Speaking from experience, when adopting BFS (p≤1, q>1), we 
could uncover the community where the subjects have intensive 
interaction, named as homophily. While with DFS (p≥1, q<1), 
we  could  divide  the  subjects  into  a  hierarchical  pattern  where 
the  subjects  play  the  same  role  within  a  grade,  named  as 
structural  equivalence.  The  two  types  of  structure  make  great 
sense  in  urban  space:  The  homophily  could  help  describe  the 
phenomenon of spatial separation and the structural equivalence 
is conducive to find the urban hierarchy. 

Though the search strategy and other parameters influences the 
detection  of  urban  structure,  the  network  itself  restricts  the 
detection. For example, for SRG with actual interaction, we are 
likely  to  find  the  homophily  and  structural  equivalence.  For 
SRG with virtual similarity between the property like functions 
of places, we utilize BFS mainly to explore the urban functional 
regions. 

To determine the number of clusters, we use several clustering 
criteria:  Davies-Bouldin  index  (Davies  and  Bouldin,  1979), 
Dunn index (Dunn, 1973), Silhouette index (Rousseeuw, 1987) 
and  so  on.  Of  course,  other  clustering  criteria  is  welcomed  as 
well.  In  certain  cases,  the  number  of  clusters  could  be  also 
decided by priori knowledge. 

3.  EVALUATION  

In this section,  we  mainly  evaluate  the  performance  of  our 
method  on  a  real-world  network,  Metro  Line  Network  in 
Shanghai (China), including parameter sensitivity, perturbation 
analysis and so on. 

3.1  Experimental Setup 

Dataset:  Line  1  to  11  of  Shanghai  metro  network  are  used  in 
this  section  and  we  transformed  the  metro  line  network  in 
Shanghai to an urban data matrix in this way: if the two subway 
stations 
 are connected directly, the pairwise distance is 
denoted as 1. Otherwise, we regard the distance is infinitely big. 
Thus,  the  connection  among  subway  stations  is  used  to 

 and 

represent the stations themselves. Here, SRG is equal to the data 
matrix. 

3.1.1  Dataset:  Line  1  to  11  of  Shanghai  metro  network  are 
used in this section and we transformed the metro line network 
in  Shanghai  to  an  urban  data  matrix  in  this  way:  if  the  two 
subway  stations 
 are  connected  directly,  the  pairwise 
distance  is  denoted  as  1.  Otherwise,  we  regard  the  distance  is 
infinitely  big.  Thus,  the  connection  among  subway  stations  is 
used to represent the stations themselves. Here, SRG is equal to 
the data matrix. 

 and 

3.1.2  Ground-truth:  The  metro  line  network  is  mixed  with 
homophily  and  structural  equivalence.  With  using  SRG  of 
metro  line  network  in  the  way  mentioned  above,  it  is  much 
easier to discover the structural equivalence. The network only 
has a hierarchy of two levels: transfer station or not. Thus, the 
number  of  clusters  (n)  are  taken  as  2  and  the  corresponding 
ground-truth  have  two  kinds  of  labels  marking  transfer  station 
or  not.  For  another  thing,  the  homophily  definitely  means 
clusters  with  subway  stations  on  the  same  line.  Thus,  the 
number  of  clusters  are  taken  as  11  and  the  corresponding 
ground-truth  has  11  unique  labels  marking  which  line  the 
subway  station  is  on.  With  using  this  SRG,  it  needs  to  catch 
information at a larger neighbourhood for obtaining structure of 
homophily. 

3.1.3  Comparison  groups:  Our  experiments  evaluate  the 
embedding vectors obtained by PEM on clustering. For the task, 
we compare the performance of PEM with that of the following 
clustering algorithms: 

Spectral  clustering  (SC)  (Frias-Martinez  and  Frias-Martinez, 
2014;  Luxburg,  2007):  SC  is  a  clustering  method  which  also 
construct  a  similarity  graph  at  first.  However,  it  is  a  naturally 
factorization approach where we take the top d eigenvectors of 
the normalized Laplacian matrix of the graph as the embedding 
vector for nodes. And then it uses k-means to do clustering. 

Hierarchical  clustering  analysis  (HCA)  (Fusco  and  Caglioni, 
2011; Rokach and Maimon, 2005): HCA is a clustering method 
which seeks to build a hierarchy of clusters. There are 2 types of 
strategies:  Agglomerative  (a  bottom-up  approach  merging 
observations from each one) and Divisive (a top-down approach 
dividing  the  observations  from  one  cluster).  Here,  we  adopt 
Agglomerative HCA. 

All  the  experiments  would  be  repeated  20  times  (if  possible) 
and the average is taken as the final results. 

3.2  Hyperparameters 

We regard that BFS and DFS are guided by hyperparameters  p 
and  q  and  thus  influence  whether  the  detected  result  of  urban 
structure  is  homophily  or  structural  equivalence.  We  now 
empirically  show  this  phenomenon.  The  other  parameters  are 
set as d=5, l=10, r=10 and k=5. 

As mentioned in Section  3.1.2, we  could  deduce  that  adopting 
BFS helps discover the structural equivalence (when n=2) while 
using  DFS  helps  find  the  homophily  (when  n=11)  in  this 
network. Figure 3 shows that when the search strategy is more 
inclined  to  BFS  (p<1  or  q  >1),  Macro-F1  scores  of  structural 
equivalence  get  higher  and  when  the  search  strategy  is  more 
inclined  to  DFS  (p>1  or  q<1),  Macro-F1  of  homophily  get 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
higher.  Additionally,  with  most  settings  of  hyperparameters, 
PEM  outperforms  SC  and  HCA  in  both  cases.  Thus,  it  proves 
that PEM is flexible, which is able to discover different kinds of 
structure  through  tuning  hyperparameters.  And  it  is  also 
accurate when the values of p and q is proper. 

Figure 3. Changes of Macro-F1 versus hyperparameters p and q: 
when the search strategy is more inclined to BFS (p<1 or q >1), 
Macro-F1 scores of structural equivalence get higher and when 
the search strategy is more inclined to DFS (p>1 or q<1), 
Macro-F1 of homophily get higher. Additionally, with most 
settings of hyperparameters, PEM outperforms SC and HCA in 
both cases. 

3.3  Parameter Sensitivity 

PEM  involves  a  set  of  parameters  and  we  examine  the 
recommendations  about  how  to  choose  the  parameters  in 
Section  2.2.  Here,  the  basic  parameters  are  set  as  d=5,  l=10, 
r=10,  k=5  and  the  hyperparameters  are  set  as  p=4,  q=1.  The 
influences  of  parameters  on  the  detection  of  homophily  and 
structural equivalence in this network are shown as Figure 4. 

As seen in Figure 4, the overall effect of parameters is positive: 
Macro-F1  scores  are  on  the  rise  despite  the  fluctuations.  It  is 
also  could  be  seen  that  the  parameters  have  little  effect  on  the 
results when n=2. As mentioned above, when p=4 and q=1, it’s 
DFS  guiding  the  random  walk  and  we  are  likely  to  discover 
structure  of  homophily  in  this  network.  Thus,  under  the 
significant  influence  of  hyperparameters,  it  is  reasonable  that 
Macro-F1 scores are not hardly affected by the parameters when 
n=2  while  Macro-F1  scores  rise  obviously.  Among 
the 
parameters, k has a significant influence on the clustering, and d 
as well as r follows. The influence of l is limited. 

3.4  Perturbation Analysis 

Since  many  real-world  datasets  co-exists  with  uncertain  noise, 
we  perform  a  perturbation  study  where  we  added  noise  data. 
The distribution of noise obeys Gaussian distribution Ν(0,σ2) (σ
∈ (0.2,0.5,1,2,4))  and  Poisson  distribution  P(λ) 
(λ ∈ 
(1,2,4,8,16))  respectively  and  the  value  of  created  noise 
matrices  is  processed  into  [0,  1].  The  experimental  results  are 
shown  as  following.  It  could  be  seen  that  Macro-F1  scores 
change little whatever the distribution of noise is. Thus, PEM is 
proved to be able to handle the problem with high noise. 

4.  CASE STUDY: URBAN STRUCTURE IN 

SHANGHAI USING TAXI TRAJECTORY DATA 

4.1  Experimental Setup 

The studied area: We take the central area within the outer ring 
of  Shanghai  as  the  studied  area  and  divide  the  area  into  4422 
uniform grids whose size is 500m×500m (Figure 6). 

Figure 4.  Parameter Sensitivity: the overall effect of 
parameters is positive: Macro-F1 scores are on the rise 
despite the fluctuations1. 

Figure 5. Perturbation analysis: The steady Macro-F1 results 
show that PEM could handle the problem with high noise 

Figure 6. The studied area: We take the central area within the 
outer ring of Shanghai as the studied area and divide the area 
into 4422 uniform grids whose size is 500m×500m. 

4.1.1  Dataset:  We  use  the  dataset  containing  trajectories  of 
over 160 million records created by more than 4,000 taxis from 
December  2nd  to  December  5th  in  2013  (a  four-day  pattern). 
Derived from the trajectory datasets, we obtain the orientation-
destination matrix about 4422 grids. 

1 Since  the  accurate  values  of  experimental  results  are  not 
repeatable, the Macro-F1 scores have a little difference. But the 
trends reflected by the experiments are provable. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                 
4.1.2  Experimental  settings:  We  set  hyperparameters  and 
parameters as p=1, q=1, d=64, l=80, r=10 and k=5. The number 
of clusters is determined to be 5 according to the fast unfolding 
algorithm. 

4.2  Result and Discussion 

As p=1 and q=1, the random walk is balanced between BFS and 
DFS.  The  detection  result  (Figure  7)  of  urban  structure  would 
thus reflect the interaction between regions faithfully. As Figure 
7(a)  shows,  the  regions  are  cohesive  and  have  clear  boundary. 
Figure  7(b)  shows  that  it  almost  confirms  to  the  boundary  of 
administrative districts. It could be seen that people seldom take 
taxi  for  a  further  place  and  the  interaction  frequency  within  a 
region  are  much  higher  than  that  between  regions  (Table  2). 
Consequently,  PEM  discovered  the  homophily  structure  of  the 
studied area successfully. 

Freq. 

Region 
1 

Region 
2 

Region 
3 

Region 
4 

Region 
5 

0.212 

0.137 

0.177 

0.502 

0.228 

0.376 

0.053 

0.082 

0.016 

0.073 

0.162 

0.204 

Region 
1 
Region 
2 
Region 
3 
Region 
4 
Region 
5 
Table 2. The interaction frequency between regions: the 
interaction frequency within a region are much higher than that 
between regions. 

0.165 

0.611 

0.314 

0.077 

0.021 

0.362 

0.257 

0.247 

0.147 

0.023 

0.413 

0.082 

0.044 

Figure 7. The detection result of urban structure in the studied 
area: (a) the visualization by ARCGIS; (b) the detection result 
compared with the administrative map: the regions are cohesive 
and have clear boundary which almost confirms to the boundary 
of administrative districts. 

5.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 

through 

structure 

tuning  hyperparameters 

Through  the  evaluation  on  the  real-world  network  (the  metro 
line  network  in  Shanghai,  China),  PEM  is  flexible  to  explore 
urban 
and 
outperforms  Spectral  Clustering  and  Hierarchical  Clustering 
Analysis with proper settings of parameters. In usual, when p is 
lower or q is higher, it is inclined to adopt BFS. In contrast, it is 
inclined  to  adopt  DFS.  In  different  networks,  BFS  (or  DFS) 
would  find  different  type  of  structure.  While  in  general,  the 
influence of parameters (dimension d, walk of length l, number 
of walks r and context size  k) have a positive influence on the 
accuracy.  Additionally,  the  perturbation  analysis  verifies  that 
PEM  is  able  to  learn  feature  presentations  for  nodes  and  do 
clustering under high dimension and high noise. 

Based  on  the  study,  with  the  taxi  dataset  in  Shanghai,  we 
utilized  PEM  to  explore  the  structure  of  region  distributions 
successfully. However, to improve the theory and method, there 
is still a long way to go. 

In  the  future  work,  we  would  add  more  experiments  with 
different  urban  sensing  data  and  other  2vec  models  and  fully 
utilize  the  flexibility  of  PEM  to  explore  urban  structure.  And 
the  systematic  study  of  setting  parameters  and  link  with  other 
theories would be extended. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This  research  has  also  been  supported  by  National  Natural 
Science  Foundation  of  China  (41571397  and  41501442)  and 
Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (2016JJ3144) . 

This  research  has  also  been  supported  in  part  by  the  Open 
Research Fund Program of Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Spatial 
Smart  Sensing  and  Services  (Shenzhen  University),  and  the 
Scientific  Research  Foundation  for  the  Returned  Overseas 
Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry (50-20150618).  

REFERENCES 

Bezdek,  J.C.,  Ehrlich,  R.,  Full,  W.,  1984.  FCM:  The  fuzzy  c-
means clustering algorithm. Computers & Geosciences 10, 191-
203. 

Bourne, L.S., 1963.  Internal  structure  of  the  city  :  readings  on 
urban form, growth, and policy. Historian 26, 1–18. 

Davies,  D.L.,  Bouldin,  D.W.,  1979.  A  Cluster  Separation 
Measure. IEEE Computer Society. 

Dunn,  J.C.,  1973.  A  fuzzy  relative  of  the  ISODATA  Process 
and  Its  Use  in  Detecting  Compact  Well-Separated  Clusters. 
Journal of Cybernetics 3, 32-57. 

Fortunato,  Santo,  2010.  Community  detection  in  graphs. 
Physics Reports 486, 75-174. 

Frias-Martinez, V., Frias-Martinez, E., 2014. Spectral clustering 
for  sensing  urban  land  use  using  Twitter  activity.  Engineering 
Applications of Artificial Intelligence 35, 237-245. 

Fusco, G., Caglioni, M., 2011. Hierarchical Clustering through 
Spatial  Interaction  Data.  The  Case  of  Commuting  Flows  in 
South-Eastern France. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grover,  A.,  Leskovec,  J.,  2016.  node2vec:  Scalable  Feature 
Learning  for  Networks,  The  ACM  SIGKDD  International 
Conference. 

Areas  and  Users  in  Location-based  Social  Networks.  AAAI 
Workshop - Technical Report. 

Gustafson,  D.E.,  Kessel,  W.C.,  1978.  Fuzzy  clustering  with  a 
fuzzy  covariance  matrix,  Decision  and  Control  Including  the 
Symposium on Adaptive Processes, 1978 IEEE Conference on, 
pp. 761-766. 

Henderson, K., Gallagher, B.,  Eliassi-Rad,  T.,  Tong,  H.,  Basu, 
S.,  Akoglu,  L.,  Koutra,  D.,  Faloutsos,  C.,  Li,  L.,  2012. 
RolX:structural role extraction & mining in large graphs, ACM 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1231-1239. 

Hoff, P.D., Raftery, A.E., Handcock, M.S., 2002. Latent Space 
Approaches  to  Social  Network  Analysis.  Journal  of  the 
American Statistical Association 97, 1090-1098. 

Rokach,  L.,  Maimon,  O.,  2005.  Clustering  Methods.  Springer 
US. 

Rousseeuw,  P.J.,  1987.  Silhouettes:  A  graphical  aid  to  the 
interpretation  and  validation  of  cluster  analysis.  Journal  of 
Computational & Applied Mathematics 20, 53-65. 

Skiena,  S.S.,  2008.  The  Algorithm  Design  Manual.  Springer 
London. 

Tang, L., Liu, H., 2011.  Leveraging  social  media  networks  for 
classification. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 23, 447-
478. 

Kohonen, T., Honkela, T., 2007. Kohonen network.  2, 1568. 

Tarjan, R., 1972. Depth first search and linear graph algorithms. 
SIAM JORNAL ON COMPUTNG 1. 

Kurant, M., Markopoulou, A., Thiran, P., 2010. On the bias of 
BFS (Breadth First Search). Teletraffic Congress, 1-8. 

Liu, Y., Liu, X., Gao, S., Gong, L., Kang, C., Zhi, Y., Chi, G., 
Shi,  L.,  2015.  Social  Sensing:  A  New  Approach 
to 
Understanding  Our  Socioeconomic  Environments.  Annals  of 
the Association of American Geographers 105, 512-530. 

Luxburg, U.V., 2007. A tutorial on spectral clustering. Statistics 
& Computing 17, 395-416. 

Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I., Weiss, Y., 2001. On Spectral Clustering: 
Analysis  and  an  algorithm.  Advances  in  Neural  Information 
Processing Systems, 849--856. 

Noulas,  A.,  Scellato,  S.,  Mascolo,  C.,  Pontil,  M.,  2011. 
Exploiting  Semantic  Annotations  for  Clustering  Geographic 

Tobler,  W.R.,  1970.  A  Computer  Movie  Simulating  Urban 
Growth  in  the  Detroit  Region.  Economic  Geography  46,  234-
240. 

Xue,  B.,  Fu,  C.,  Zhan,  S.,  2014.  A  Study  on  Sentiment 
Computing  and  Classification  of  Sina  Weibo  with  Word2vec, 
IEEE International Congress on Big Data, pp. 358-363. 

Yao, Y., Li, X., Liu, X., Liu, P., Liang, Z., Zhang, J., Mai, K., 
2016.  Sensing  spatial  distribution  of  urban  land  use  by 
integrating  points-of-interest  and  Google  Word2Vec  model.  1-
24. 

Yuan,  J.,  Zheng,  Y.,  Xie,  X.,  2012.  Discovering  regions  of 
different  functions  in  a  city  using  human  mobility  and  POIs, 
ACM  SIGKDD  International  Conference  on  Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 186-194. 

 
 
 
