8
1
0
2

y
a
M
1
1

]
P
A

.
t
a
t
s
[

1
v
4
7
2
4
0
.
5
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measuring heterogeneity in urban expansion via spatial entropy

Linda Altieri, Daniela Cocchi, Giulia Roli
Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Bologna, via Belle Arti, 41, 40126, Bologna, Italy

Abstract

The lack of efﬁciency in urban diffusion is a debated issue, important for biologists, urban
specialists, planners and statisticians, both in developed and new developing countries. Many
approaches have been considered to measure urban sprawl, i.e. chaotic urban expansion; such
idea of chaos is here linked to the concept of entropy. Entropy, ﬁrstly introduced in informa-
tion theory, rapidly became a standard tool in ecology, biology and geography to measure the
degree of heterogeneity among observations; in these contexts, entropy measures should in-
clude spatial information. The aim of this paper is to employ a rigorous spatial entropy based
approach to measure urban sprawl associated to the diffusion of metropolitan cities. In order to
assess the performance of the considered measures, a comparative study is run over alternative
urban scenarios; afterwards, measures are used to quantify the degree of disorder in the urban
expansion of three cities in Europe. Results are easily interpretable and can be used both as an
absolute measure of urban sprawl and for comparison over space and time.

Keywords: urban sprawl, environmental heterogeneity, spatial entropy, categorical
variables.

1

Introduction

Urban sprawl is characterized by uncontrolled development of cities into surrounding areas, which
has aroused wide social focus because its induced urbanization is inefﬁcient, dispersed and may
impede sustainable development. Rapid urban growth is quite alarming worldwide, and the im-
portance of conducting research on this topic is strongly felt (Johnson, 2001; Ewing, 2008; Rosni
and Noor, 2016). Although an accurate deﬁnition of urban sprawl is still debated, the general con-
sensus is that urban sprawl is characterized by ‘unplanned and uneven pattern of growth, driven
by a multitude of processes and leading to a inefﬁcient resource utilization’ (Bhatta et al., 2010).
More deﬁnitions appear in Jaeger et al. (2010) and focus on the negative consequences of sprawl.
The negative impacts of urban sprawl concern many aspects, not only for human life quality (e.g.
increased costs and time for transportation), but also for the environment. The dispersion of ur-
ban areas increases pollution, waste of soil and soil consumption. This endangers ecosystems
and species, and reduces the availability of land for agriculture, water bodies, forests and other
natural areas (EEA and FOEN, 2016). In addition, urban sprawl does not foster climate changes
mitigation, even if variations in climate do not immediately ﬁt with the velocity of uncontrolled
urbanization. Any spatial planning strategy has a different impact on climate change (Bart, 2010;
Stone, 2012), but the standard consequences of uncontrolled urbanization concern strong precipi-
tation events, additional heat due to increased emission of carbon dioxide and, in particular, heat
island effects.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
In Europe, urban sprawl is an increasing issue (EEA, 2006; Couch et al., 2007; EEA and
FOEN, 2016), which can be evaluated according to several viewpoints. For instance, EEA and
FOEN (2016) stress that the spatial conﬁguration of the built up areas is a fundamental component
of urban proliferation. Different arguments in EEA reports point out the impact of urban sprawl:
the negative effects mentioned before are even more evident if the costs for future generations are
taken into account, and are related to the ideas of fragmentation, degradation and consequences on
ecosystems.

The literature about sprawl is voluminous (e.g. Torrens, 2008; Bhatta et al., 2010; Cabral et al.,
2013; Ewing and Hamidi, 2015; Oueslati et al., 2015); the quantiﬁcation of the phenomenon devel-
ops according to different routes that keep into account alternative formulations of demographic,
social and economic variables. This is partly due to the difﬁculties of a unique deﬁnition. More-
over, characterisation of sprawl in the literature is often narrative and subjective, and measurement
largely depends on data, to the point that existing studies yield contrary results for the same cities
in several cases (Torrens, 2008; Bhatta et al., 2010). The basic sprawl indicator is the low level
of population density over an area; in other words, it declares whether an unnecessary waste of
urbanised land occurs. Alternatively, sprawl may be deﬁned in cost terms, as in Benﬁeld et al.
(1999), or by ratios of urban growth (Ewing and Hamidi, 2015). A lot of sprawl measures are
indeed based on ratios: relative measures quantify attributes of urban growth and can be compared
among cities, among different zones within a city, or across different times (Bhatta et al., 2010).
Such ratios are easy to interpret and receive a lot of discussion, but are statistically poor. In order
to capture different aspects that are related to sprawl, Jiang et al. (2007) proposed an integrated ur-
ban sprawl measure that combines 13 indices; unfortunately, the ﬁnal measure requires extensive
inputs of temporal data, and does not mention any threshold to characterise a city as sprawling or
non-sprawling.

Among the proposals for urban sprawl measurements, there is a number of spatial or landscape
metrics, that have long been used in landscape ecology. Landscape metrics aim at evaluating the
spatial pattern of land cover classes or entire landscape mosaics of a geographic area. Indeed,
the urbanization of a territory can be assessed according to the exhibited pattern of land cover
classes: a sprawled city is in contrast with a compact one, with ’empty’ (i.e. non-urban) spaces
and scattered urban areas denoting inefﬁcient development. Consequently, land cover and land
use data are particularly suitable for urban sprawl measurements. Such data usually are vector
(polygonal) or raster (pixel) spatial data coming from remote sensing images, where the territory
is classiﬁed in a ﬁnite number of categories according to the prevailing land use, after a deﬁnition
about what land use classes are considered as urban or non-urban. Then, the pattern of urban
areas and its evolution over time can be exploited to quantify urban dispersion as lack of spatial
clustering (compactness) of the urban patch. For an approach to sprawl measurement based on a
comparative use of Moran’s I with land use data, see Altieri et al. (2014).

Two aspects need to be considered when assessing the presence of urban sprawl with land use
data. First, the objective is to detect lack of compactness, i.e. heterogeneity, in the territory by
looking at the spatial dispersion of the urban tissue. Secondly, the variable of interest, land use, is
qualitative and unordered; this aspect is particularly critical for environmental statistics, as it limits
the set of tools for data analysis. The need to deal with categorical variables and the detection of

2

heterogeneity in the territory support the idea of employing entropy measures. Shannon’s entropy
is used in several ﬁelds, such as geography, ecology, biology, to assess the heterogeneity of a
population over an area. Ecological concepts, such as evenness and richness, are strictly related
to heterogeneity, and entropy represents the utmost index to measure heterogeneity in a dataset.
In the context of urban sprawl, entropy has proved to be a stringent measurement tool (Yeh and
Li, 2001), and is still a widely used technique, suitable for integration of remote sensing and GIS
(Bhatta et al., 2010; Chong, 2017; Liu and Chen, 2018). While entropy succeeds in working with
qualitative variables and quantifying the heterogeneity of a dataset, it suffers from the drawback of
not considering the role of space as a source of heterogeneity in determining the variable outcomes.
Indeed, Shannon’s entropy is computed based on the proportions of the land use classes, not on
their spatial conﬁgurations, and two territories with the same proportions and very different degrees
of compactness for the urban tissue have the same entropy value; the same holds for territories with
different area size. Shannon’s entropy is not affected by size, shape and number of sub-areas of a
spatial territory, while a spatial metric for urban sprawl should be. The urban sprawl issue is tightly
bond to the spatial location of land use data. Therefore, appropriate studies of sprawl which make
use of entropy measures should introduce spatial information.

Over the past decades, two main approaches have been adopted to include spatial information
into an entropy measure. Extending Theil’s work (1972), Batty (1974, 1976, 2010) introduced the
ﬁrst approach by deﬁning a spatial entropy measure accounting for unequal space partition into
sub-areas. In 2002, this proposal was modiﬁed by Karlstr¨om and Ceccato to satisfy the property
of additivity, i.e. decomposing of the global index into local components. The main drawback of
this approach is that such entropy can only be computed for a binary variable. Moreover, the local
terms are not entropies and do not possess the properties of the global one, and results are heavily
affected by the selected area partition. Nevertheless, the approach proves to be informative in the
context of urban sprawl. The second approach to spatial entropy is based on a suitable transfor-
mation of the study variable that accounts for the distance between realizations (co-occurrences).
The main proposals have been made by O’Neill et al. (1988), Li and Reynolds (1993), Leibovici
(2009) and Leibovici et al. (2014), but all these distance-based measures do not enjoy the addi-
tivity property and rely on the choice of a single distance without capturing the behaviour of the
studied variable. A recent work by Altieri et al. (2018a) fulﬁls desirable properties by propos-
ing a set of spatial entropy measures starting from the co-occurrence approach and focusing on
pairs of realizations. The resulting entropy is decomposed into the information due to space and
the remaining information brought by the variable itself once space is considered. The proposal
preserves additivity and disaggregates results, allowing for partial and global syntheses.

The properties of spatial entropy measures make them an appealing tool to evaluate urban
sprawl from a spatial perspective. A spatial entropy measure is sensitive to the spatial dispersion
of urban patches over an area and may be able to separate the heterogeneity of land use data due
to the lack of spatial compactness from the heterogeneity due to other components. They enjoy
basic desirable properties of any spatial index (Anselin, 1995), i.e.
the additivity between local
and global results. They also receive interpretation and are suitable for delivering results across
different areas of expertise.

The main aim of this work is to adopt entropy based tools for measuring urban sprawl in terms

3

of spatial compactness or dispersion. If sprawl is considered as a negative condition, and is mea-
sured by means of spatial entropy, a low level of entropy is desirable, i.e. a non-chaotic (compact)
urban conﬁguration. We present a thorough assessment of the advantages and disadvantages of a
selection of spatial entropy measures which have not been employed in the context of urban sprawl
measurement yet, both with a comparative study on simulated data and via a case study on three
European cities. The simulation study compares spatial entropy values across representative ur-
ban conﬁgurations: the monocentric, the polycentric and the decentralized city. In addition, the
resulting ranges of entropy values may be used as reference intervals for comparison to real case
studies, as in the application, where we propose an example of comparison over space and time,
that can be extended as wished. Our results can be combined with measures integrating relevant
demographic, social or economical variables affecting urban sprawl.

The motivating case study comes from ofﬁcial European land use data. We selected two time
points, 1990 and 2012, for the commuting belts of three cities in Europe: Bologna (also studied in
Altieri et al., 2014), Eindhoven and Lublin. They belong to countries with different levels of urban
sprawl (EEA, 2006).

Though spatial entropy is applied to the speciﬁc issue of urban sprawl, the techniques illustrated
in the present paper may be used for any phenomenon whose spatial distribution and heterogeneity
is of interest. Their evaluation is relevant for climate and meteorology studies, e.g. the spatial dis-
tribution of metereological phenomena, for ecological purposes, e.g. species distribution (Altieri
et al., 2018a), for general landscape and geographical studies, for the assessment of environmental
risks, e.g. earthquakes and wildﬁres, for atmospheric studies, e.g. polluting substances, for disease
mapping.

In the present paper, in Section 2 we revisit the works by Batty (1974) and Karlstr¨om and Cec-
cato (2002) under a uniﬁed statistical framework. We also illustrate the approach of Altieri et al.
(2018a) with a special focus on its use in urban sprawl studies. In Section 3, we build a simulation
study, which compares, evaluates and discusses the performance of the two approaches for spa-
tial entropy measures under different urban scenarios. This is useful both for further applications,
since the study covers the main urban conﬁgurations, and as a contribution to the statistical theory
of spatial entropy measures. In Section 4, the measures are applied to the case study; this consti-
tutes a further practical contribution to the discussion on urban sprawl. Some concluding remarks
can be found in Section 5.

This work is implemented in R (R Core Team, 2017). It makes use of the packages sp (Bivand
et al., 2013), spatstat (Baddeley et al., 2015) and dependencies, and of the recent package
SpatEntropy (Altieri et al., 2018b) now available on CRAN.

2 The use of spatial information in entropy measures

In many environmental and urban studies, the deﬁnition of entropy measures coincides with Shan-
non’s formula: given a categorical variable X with I possible outcomes, the entropy is

H(X) =

I
(cid:88)

i=1

p(xi) log

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)

p(xi)

4

(1)

where p(xi) is the probability of the ith outcome and log (1/p(xi)) is the information function,
which measures the information brought by outcome xi (Cover and Thomas, 2006). Entropy is a
non-negative quantity, which measures the average ’information’ or ’surprise’ concerning an out-
come of X. The more the categories of X are equally likely, the higher the entropy; if a category
of X is far more likely than others, the entropy is low, as one can predict the behaviour of X and
data do not carry much information. Thus, entropy synthesizes the heterogeneity of X outcomes
in a single number; data with very different spatial conﬁgurations but the same probability mass
function for X share the same entropy. In the context of urban sprawl, this is not desirable. For
example, an area which is partly urbanized and partly rural may be compact, with an urban nu-
cleous and rural surroundings, or dispersed, i.e. sprawled, with many small scattered urban areas.
Shannon’s entropy does not detect the difference in the two patterns and returns the same value if
the proportion of urbanized and non-urbanized territory is the same across the two conﬁgurations.
For this reason, an extension to spatial entropy is needed. The seminal attempt to extend
(1) into a spatial entropy measure developed by Batty (1974) is presented in Section 2.1.1; its
most relevant extension, proposed by Karlstr¨om and Ceccato (2002) is sketched in Section 2.1.2.
A recent approach to spatial entropy, proposed by Altieri et al. (2018a), is in Section 2.2. All
measures assume a peculiar meaning in the analysis of urban sprawl. They are very suitable in
distinguishing the desirable situation of urban compactness from urban sprawl.

Most spatial entropy measures make use of the concepts of spatial adjacency and neighbour-
hood. The notion of neighbourhood is linked to the assumption that occurrences at certain locations
are inﬂuenced, in a positive or negative sense, by what happens at surrounding locations, i.e. their
neighbours. The system can be represented by a graph (Bondy and Murty, 2008), where each loca-
tion is a vertex and neighbouring locations are connected by edges. The simplest way of represent-
ing a neighbourhood system is via an adjacency matrix: for G spatial units, A = {agg(cid:48)}g,g(cid:48)=1,...,G
is a square G × G matrix such that agg(cid:48) = 1 when there is an edge from vertex g to vertex g(cid:48), and
agg(cid:48) = 0 otherwise; in other words, agg(cid:48) = 1 if g(cid:48) ∈ N (g), the neighbourhood of area g. Its diago-
nal elements are all zero by default. In this work, spatial units may be pixels or polygons, deﬁned
via representative coordinate pairs, such as the area centroids, which are used to measure distances
and deﬁne what units are neighbours. In the remainder of the paper, the word ’adjacent’ is used
accordingly to mean ’neighbouring’, i.e. connected in the graph, while the word ’contiguous’ is
used for pixels or polygons sharing a border on the map, i.e. a topological contact.

2.1 Towards additive spatial entropy

2.1.1 Batty’s spatial entropy

A very appreciable attempt to include spatial information into Shannon’s entropy starts from a re-
formulation of (1). The categorical variable X is recoded into I dummy variables, each identifying
the occurrence of a speciﬁc category of X, where, by construction, pi = p(xi).

This approach is proposed by Batty (1974; 1976) to deﬁne a spatial entropy which extends
Theil’s work (1972). In a spatial context, a phenomenon of interest F occurs over an observation
window of size T partitioned into G areas of size Tg. This deﬁnes G dummy variables identifying
the occurrence of F over a generic area g, g = 1, . . . , G. Given that F occurs somewhere over the

5

window, its occurrence in area g takes place with probability pg, where (cid:80)
g pg = 1. The intensity
is obtained as λg = pg/Tg, where Tg is the area size, and is assumed constant within each area.
Shannon’s entropy of F may be written as

H(F ) =

G
(cid:88)

g=1

pg log

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1
pg

=

G
(cid:88)

g=1

λgTg log

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1
λg

+

G
(cid:88)

g=1

λgTg log

(cid:19)

.

(cid:18) 1
Tg

(2)

Batty (1976) shows that the ﬁrst term on the right hand side of the formula converges to the contin-
uous version of Shannon’s entropy (R´enyi, 1961), namely the differential entropy, as the area size
Tg tends to zero. The differential entropy is rewritten in terms of pg, giving Batty’s spatial entropy

HB(F ) =

G
(cid:88)

g=1

pg log

(cid:19)

.

(cid:18) Tg
pg

(3)

It expresses the average amount of information brought by the occurrence of F over the areas, and
includes Tg that accounts for unequal space partition. Analogously to Shannon’s entropy, which
is high when the I categories of X are equally represented over a (non spatial) data collection,
Batty’s entropy is high when the phenomenon of interest F is equally intense over the G areas
partitioning the observation window (i.e. when λg = λ for all g). Batty’s entropy HB(F ) reaches
a minimum value equal to log(Tg∗) when pg∗ = 1 and pg = 0 for all g (cid:54)= g∗, with g∗ denoting the
area with the smallest size. The maximum value of Batty’s entropy is log(T ), reached when the
intensity of F is the same over all areas, i.e. λg = 1/T for all g. This maximum value does not
depend on the area partition, nor on the discrete or continuous nature of F , but only on the size of
the observation window. When Tg = 1 for each g, HB(F ) is a Shannon’s entropy of F equivalent
to (1), and the index ranges accordingly in [0, log(G)].

When the target is to measure urban sprawl, F denotes the presence of urbanization. A high
level for Batty’s entropy is not desirable, as it indicates constant urban intensity, i.e. scattering of
urban patches across regions, denoting sprawl. A low level, on the contrary, indicates that some
areas in the window have a very high urban density (usually, the city centre) while others tend not
to present urbanization (i.e. the outside areas). Therefore, when Batty’s entropy is low the city is
compact and a scarce level of sprawl is present, which is interpreted as a positive condition.

2.1.2 A LISA version of Batty’s spatial entropy

A challenging attempt to introduce additive properties and to include the idea of neighbourhood
in Batty’s entropy index (3) is due to Karlstr¨om and Ceccato (2002), following the LISA theory
(Anselin, 1995). Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy index HKC(F ) starts by weighting the proba-
bility of occurrence of F in a given spatial unit g, pg, with its neighbouring values:

(cid:101)pg =

G
(cid:88)

g(cid:48)=1

agg(cid:48)pg(cid:48).

6

(4)

Then, an information function is deﬁned, ﬁxing Tg = 1, as I((cid:101)pg) = log (1/(cid:101)pg). In this proposal,
the elements on the diagonal of the adjacency matrix A are non-zero, i.e. each area neighbours
itself and enters the computation of I((cid:101)pg). Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy index is

HKC(F ) =

G
(cid:88)

g=1

pg log

(cid:19)

.

(cid:18) 1
(cid:101)pg

(5)

The maximum of HKC(F ) does not depend on the choice of the neighbourhood and is log(G). As
the neighbourhood reduces, i.e. as A tends to the identity matrix, HKC(F ) coincides with Batty’s
spatial entropy (3) in the case of Tg = 1 for all g. The sum of local measures pgI((cid:101)pg) constitutes
the global index (5), preserving the LISA property of additivity.

One major disadvantage of (3) and (5) is that a categorical variable X with I > 2 outcomes
cannot be used, since only one category enters the measure. In other words, F may be a speciﬁc
category of X, say F = X ∗
i ) is computed to assess the spatial conﬁguration of the
realizations of X ∗
i ) are computed, but no way
is proposed to synthesize them into a single spatial entropy measure for X. Moreover, the local
components are not entropy measures themselves. Lastly, conclusions are affected by the choice
of the area partition. Nevertheless, Batty’s and Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s approach is expected to
be helpful in the context of urban sprawl, and is assessed in Sections 3 and 4.

i . Thus, for a categorical X, I different HKC(X ∗

i , and HKC(X ∗

2.2 Spatial entropy based on a transformation of the study variable

A second way to build a spatial entropy measure consists in deﬁning a new categorical variable
Z, where each realization identiﬁes pairs {xi, xj} of occurrences of X over space (O’Neill et al.,
1988; Li and Reynolds, 1993; Leibovici, 2009). Such change of variable is crucial in a spatial
context, since space is now considered via the distances between observations forming a pair. For
I categories of X, the new variable Z has R = (I 2 +I)/2 categories. The attention moves from the
computation of (1), namely H(X), to an index of the same form, Shannon’s entropy of Z, H(Z).
Altieri et al. (2018a) follow the approach based on Z and introduce a second discrete variable
W , that represents space by classifying the distances at which the two occurrences take place.
These classes wk, with k = 1, . . . , K, cover all possible distances within the observation window.
The deﬁnition of the classes is exogenous and depends on the study at hand (Altieri et al., 2018a).
Each distance category wk implies the choice of a corresponding adjacency matrix Ak, which
identiﬁes pairs where the two realizations of X lie at a distance belonging to the range wk.

Thanks to the introduction of W , the entropy of Z may be decomposed as

H(Z) = M I(Z, W ) + H(Z)W

(6)

following the fundamentals of Information Theory (Cover and Thomas, 2006):
the ﬁrst term
M I(Z, W ) is known as mutual information and measures the amount of the entropy of Z which is
explained by its relatioship with W , while the second term H(Z)W is the conditional, or residual,
entropy, quantifying the remaining amount of entropy of Z once the effect of W is removed. In a
spatial context, the two terms acquire a new meaning: M I(Z, W ) is the quantity of interest in this

7

context, and is called spatial mutual information, because Z identiﬁes pairs of categories of spatial
observations and W collects categories of distances where pairs can take place. Spatial mutual
information quantiﬁes the part of entropy of Z due to the spatial conﬁguration W ; for the same
reason, H(Z)W is the spatial global residual entropy, quantifying the information brought by Z af-
ter space has been taken into account. The more Z depends on W , i.e. the more the realizations of
X are spatially associated, the higher the spatial mutual information. Conversely, when the spatial
association among the realizations of X is weak, the entropy of Z is mainly due to spatial global
residual entropy.

When it comes to sprawl, the variable of interest X has categories urban/non-urban, and Z iden-
tiﬁes pairs with the three possible unordered combinations of urban/non-urban areas (urban/urban,
urban/non-urban, non-urban/non-urban). A compact city represents the situation where the X out-
comes should be highly positively correlated. In such case, spatial mutual information tends to
be high, because urban areas generally have urban neighbours, while non-urban areas have non-
urban neighbours; space plays a relevant role in determining the entropy of Z. The overall value
of M I(Z, W ), however, is negatively inﬂuenced by what happens at large distance ranges, where
usually scarce correlation is present. Hence, spatial mutual information for the whole dataset may
approach zero even when a compact pattern occurs.

The variable W helps in overcoming this drawback, since the two terms forming H(Z) can be
further decomposed. Indeed, K subsets of realizations of Z are available, denoted by Z|wk; for
all the distance classes wk a set of K conditional distributions is obtained, that sum up to the two
components of (6). When measuring urban sprawl, this means that the degree of compactness of a
city may be quantiﬁed at different distance ranges, which can help in understanding the extent and
seriousness of the sprawl phenomenon.

From Information Theory, spatial mutual information:

M I(Z, W ) =

K
(cid:88)

k=1

p(wk)P I(Z|wk) =

K
(cid:88)

k=1

p(wk)

R
(cid:88)

r=1

p(zr|wk) log

(cid:19)

(cid:18) p(zr|wk)
p(zr)

(7)

is a weighted sum of partial terms P I(Z|wk), each quantifying the contribution of the kth distance
range to the spatial mutual information between Z and W .
In other words, each partial term
measures the degree of association (compactness) in the city pattern at each distance range. The
focus is expected to be on short distance ranges, where the difference between a compact city and
a dispersed one is more evident. By exploring these terms, an indication of the degree of sprawl
can be provided.
Analogously,

H(Z)W =

K
(cid:88)

k=1

p(wk)H(Z|wk) =

K
(cid:88)

k=1

p(wk)

R
(cid:88)

r=1

p(zr|wk) log

(cid:18)

1
p(zr|wk)

(cid:19)
,

(8)

where the partial residual entropy terms measure the partial contributions to the entropy of Z due
to sources other than the spatial conﬁguration. As regards sprawl, a great value for H(Z|wk),
especially at short distance ranges, is a hint for urban dispersion.

8

The additive terms in (7) and (8), together with their sums, constitute a rich set of spatial
entropy measures. In particular, spatial mutual information has theoretical support to be considered
a reliable method for measuring urban heterogeneity. It is able to maintain the information about
the categories of X by exploiting the trasformed variable Z, to consider different distance ranges
simultaneously, to quantify the overall role of space, and to be easily interpretable. A comparative
study for different urban conﬁgurations is developed in what follows, in order to verify its ability
to detect sprawl.

3 Spatial entropy measures on simulated urban settings

The ﬂexibility and informativity of the spatial entropy indices discussed in Section 2 are assessed
with a comparative study, which aims at understanting the differences between the two approaches
over three main urban conﬁgurations. Following Tsai (2005), they are identiﬁed as monocentric
city, polycentric city and decentralized city. The monocentric city is considered the most positive
situation as regards the urban pattern; the polycentric city is an intermediate, less compact, situation
which may suffer from sprawl; the decentralized conﬁguration is concerned by the sprawl issue.
An example of the three settings is shown in Figure 1.

Insert Figure 1 about here

The three scenarios initially come as point patterns on a square area of size 100. The monocentric
and polycentric scenarios are generated from the intensity function of a Thomas process (Baddeley
et al., 2015), i.e. a Poisson cluster point process, with one cluster for the monocentric case and
four clusters for the polycentric case. The decentralized pattern is generated following the intensity
function of a homogeneous Poisson process. For the three urban scenarios, 1000 datasets are
simulated. Then, the point patterns are gridded and turned into raster data: each data matrix is
40×40 pixels, so that each pixel has side 0.25 and area size 0.0625. The binary variable is X
with x1 = urban and x0 = non-urban. Consequently, Z has 3 categories: z1 = {urban, urban},
z2 = {urban, non-urban}, z3 = {non-urban, non-urban}. Parameters for data generation are
such that, for each of the 1000 realizations, the number of urban and non-urban pixels is the same
across the three scenarios. This way, Shannon’s entropy would not be able to distinguish among
the conﬁgurations, while we check how the measures of Section 2 succeed in detecting sprawl.

3.1 Batty’s and Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy

Entropies of Section 2.1 cannot be computed directly on the pixel grid, since only one realization
of X occurs over each pixel, while such entropy measures need a population of pixels over a wider
area. The phenomenon F is here deﬁned as the occurrence of urban pixels, i.e. F = X1. Since
these measures are substantially affected by the area partition, we check two different options
for splitting the observation area into sub-areas. Firstly, the observation area is partitioned into
G1 = 20 areas of different size, by randomly generating 20 centroids over the area and then
performing a Dirichlet tessellation, i.e. assigning each pixel to the area with the closest centroid.

9

A second option, more appropriate in the context of urban sprawl, is to partition the observation
area into concentric sub-areas, which can give a better idea of city expansion into surrounding
areas. We choose G2 = 5 annuli, deﬁned by concentric rings, with the same width, i.e. the same
difference between the radius of the outer ring and the one of the inner ring. The annuli center is
the observation area centroid, and their width is chosen so that they cover the whole area. The two
options are shown in Figure 2 for a monocentric dataset. For both options, the probabilities pg are
estimated in each of the 1000 simulations as the proportions of urban pixels over the sub-areas.

Insert Figure 2 about here
Insert Figure 3 about here

Batty’s entropy for the three scenarios and the two partition options is shown in the boxplots Figure
3. The measure is able to distinguish among the three urban conﬁgurations as regards spatial
the monocentric, non sprawled case has a lower entropy distribution, the polycentric
entropy:
scenario returns intermediate values and the decentralized pattern returns a distribution of very
high entropy values, close to Batty’s maximum. The distinction between the decentralized scenario
and the other two is evident with both partition options, but the concentric one, more suitable in an
urban context, shows that the ranges for all three scenarios do not overlap: this case can be used
as a reference set in real studies. For comparison purposes, relative values (i.e. divided by the
maximum log(100)) should be used: the lowest value for the decentralized pattern is 0.985, thus
considered a benchmark for urban sprawl.

For Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy, different possibilities for the neighbourhood distances
between the sub-areas’ centroids are considered, in order to quantify I((cid:101)pg). For partition option 1,
three neighbourhoods are set using the 5th percentile, ﬁrst quartile and median of the distribution
of distances among the G1 = 20 areas’ centroids; they are equal to nd11 = 1.473, nd12 = 3.654
and nd13 = 5.335. For option 2, four neighbourhoods are possible over the 5 annuli, i.e. up to
the jth farthest area, j = 1, . . . , 4. We name them nd21 = 1Ann, nd22 = 2Ann, nd23 = 3Ann
and nd24 = 4Ann, where jAnn means ’up to the jth farthest annulus’. The estimates of (cid:101)pg are
computed for the 3 neighbourhoods of the ﬁrst case and the 4 neighbourhoods of the second case
as averages of the neighbouring estimated probabilities.

Results for Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy are shown in Figure 4, again for the three urban
conﬁgurations and all neighbourhood options. This entropy measure distinguishes the ﬁrst two
urban patterns from the decentralized one when the neighbourhood distance is small. The sec-
ond partition option (lower panels) yields again more suitable results. However, the interquartile
ranges tend to overlap, therefore, the measure is not generally able to determine what type of urban
conﬁguration is present. While Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s extension to Batty’s entropy is interesting
from a theoretical point of view because of the LISA-type properties, it does not seem to provide
major advantages in practical situations. Widening the neighbourhood (from left to right panels
in both lines of Figure 4) tends to increase all entropy values and to generate confounding among
patterns. It should also be remembered that the results shown in the panels represent choices that
are separately, not jointly, computed, with the consequence of obtaining limited information in
applied case studies.

Insert Figure 4 about here

10

The overall limit of this approach is that results are heavily affected by the choice of the area

partition.

3.2 Spatial mutual information and residual entropy

For the computation of the entropy set of Section 2.2, breaks for the distance ranges must be
chosen, where the distance concerns pairs of pixels, not sub-areas as in Section 2.1.2, and is mea-
sured between pixel centroids. [1.13] Two options are considered in the simulation study. The
ﬁrst one is motivated by the tradition of spatial statistics, where the so called 4 nearest neigh-
bour system (i.e. pixels sharing a border) and the analogous 12 nearest neighbours system are of
standard use (Anselin, 1995). Accordingly, the ﬁrst two distance breaks chosen for option 1 are
w11 = [0, 0.25] and w12 =]0.25, 0.5], where 0.25 is the distance between contiguous pixels’ cen-
troids; the remaining breaks are w13 =]0.5, 1.25], i.e. up to 5 pixels along the cardinal directions,
and w14 =]1.25, dmax], dmax = 13.789 being the maximum distance between pixels within the
observation area. This way, the ﬁrst three classes are quite small, while the last one is very large.
In the measurement of urban sprawl, the focus is on what happens at small distance ranges, where
a lack of spatial association, i.e. a high presence of pairs of type {urban, non-urban}, indicates
dispersion, thus sprawl. Therefore, detailed results are needed for small distances, while aggre-
gate results are enough at large distances. The second option follows the same criterion as the
neighbourhood distance choice in Section 3.1 [1.13]: the empirical distribution of pixel distances
is computed, and the breaks are chosen as the 5th, 25th and 50th percentile: w21 = [0, 1.346],
w22 =]1.346, 3.260], w23 =]3.260, 5.130], w24 =]5.130, 13.789]. The global values are not affected
by the choice of the wk and can be further modiﬁed if wished. Pairs are built for each distance range
wk according to the speciﬁc adjacency matrix Ak, which identiﬁes the pairs of pixels at a distance
that belongs to the kth range. The rule of moving rightward and downward is adopted along the
observation window in order to identify neighbouring pairs, to avoid double counting. Then, each
pZ|wk is estimated using proportions for the three categories of Z at the speciﬁc distance range.

Shannon’s entropy computed for X or Z is the same, and does not depend on the spatial conﬁg-
uration. Thus, entropy H(Z) can be safely used to evaluate the entropy of the variable of interest,
i.e. urbanization, with the additional advantage of considering distances between urban/non-urban
pixels. Spatial mutual information illustrates how the role of space is detected following the three
considered spatial conﬁgurations. Since the main focus of this work is on the contribution of the
partial terms, rather than on the global value, spatial partial information terms are shown in Figure
5 for the two distance class options.

Insert Figure 5 about here

For the ﬁrst distance option (higher panels) an appreciable inﬂuence of space is detected at very
short distances for the ﬁrst two spatial patterns (mono- and polycentric), while the difference be-
tween the two becomes more evident as distance increases. For spatial mutual information, we
ought to obtain the same results for mono- and polycentric cities at w11: when only contiguous
pixels are considered, the spatial behaviour of the two conﬁgurations is the same. The second
option (lower panels) has wider distance classes: class w21 aggregates former classes w11, w12

11

and w13. Here, the distinction among conﬁgurations is very evident for w21. For further distance
ranges, the role of space is only detected in the monocentric scenario. No mutual information is
detected at any distance over the decentralized patterns, where no spatial structure is present and
space does not help in explaining the data behaviour. Spatial mutual information can be interpreted
as a sprawl detector: a high mutual information value implies positive association among urban
areas and positive association among non-urban ones, and indicates a compact urban expansion.
Another appreciable advantage of this measure is that information at different distance ranges is
available and knowledge is gained about the data spatial behaviour. The boxplots in Figure 5 can
be used as reference intervals for assessing real case studies, since no overlap occurs between a
compact and a sprawled situation. At very broad distance classes (right hand side panels) the lack
of distinction among patterns is expected and is of scarce interest in sprawl studies. The choice of
the classes does not affect the global result, unlike the choice of Batty’s area partition.

Results are not shown for spatial residual entropy, as its interpretation is symmetrical to the
interpretation of spatial mutual information: a high proportion of residual entropy at short distance
ranges denotes urban sprawl. We believe spatial mutual information to be the key component of
entropy for drawing conclusions on sprawl. Beyond enjoying the theoretical properties summa-
rized in Section 2, spatial mutual information proves to be effective in measuring urban sprawl and
distinguishing among scenarios.

4 Measuring urban sprawl in Europe via spatial entropy

The case study comes from ofﬁcial European sources. Land use data for the entire European terri-
tory are made available by CORINE (COoRdination of INformation on the Environment) project
(EEA, 2011), which integrates remote sensing images and photo interpretation to produce a dataset
classifying the spatial units (pixels) into 44 land use classes. The coordinate system is EPSG:4326
from the World Geodetic System 1984, used in GPS. The datasets are made of pixels of size
250×250 metres. Guidelines are then provided to dichotomize the dataset into urban and non-
urban pixels, transforming land use data in Urban Morphological Zone (UMZ) data. An Urban
Morphological Zone can be deﬁned as ‘a set of urban areas laying less than 200m apart’ (EEA,
2011). The Corine Land Cover classes used to build the Urban Morphological Zone dataset are:
‘Continuous urban fabric’, ‘Discontinuous urban fabric’, ‘Industrial or commercial units’, ‘Green
urban areas’. Moreover, ‘Port areas’, ‘Airports’, ‘Road and rail networks’ and ‘Sport and leisure
facilities’ are also considered if they are neighbours to the core classes. UMZ data are useful to
identify shapes and patterns of urban areas, and thus to detect urban sprawl (Altieri et al., 2014).
Data are available for years 1990, 2006 and 2012; we selected the ﬁrst and last time point for
three cities in different areas of Europe. Cities are chosen based on results in EEA and FOEN
(2016): this report measures sprawl at country level based on three indices which take different
aspects into account. We focused on the DIS, dispersion of built-up areas, which characterises the
settlement pattern according to a geometric perspective. The ﬁrst city is Eindhoven, The Nether-
lands, chosen because the country is classiﬁed among the highly sprawled ones. The second city
is Lublin, Poland, one of the countries below the average European sprawl level. The third one is

12

Bologna, Italy, a country with an average level of sprawl. They were selected together with their
commuting belts, i.e. an extension of the urban centre when this stretches beyond the administra-
tive city boundaries; the belts include the municipalities surrounding (i.e. sharing borders) with the
main city. For Eindhoven, they are Best, Eersel, Geldrop, Heeze-Leende, Nuenen, Oirschot, Son
en Breugel, Veldhoven and Waalre. For Lublin, they are Głusk, Jastk´ow, Konopnica, Niedrzwica
Du˙za, Niemce, ´Swidnik and W´olka. For Bologna, they are Anzola dell’Emilia, Calderara di Reno,
Casalecchio di Reno, Castel Maggiore, Castenaso, Granarolo dell’Emilia, Pianoro, San Lazzaro di
Savena, Sasso Marconi, Zola Predosa. A total of six binary raster datasets is thus considered: 3
cities at 2 time points, see Figure 6.

Insert Figure 6 about here

Polygonal maps with administrative boundaries are superimposed over Europe for selecting
the areas of interest. The three cities have a similar population and spatial extension. Indeed, the
enclosing rectangle around Eindhoven is 121×127 pixels, and the urbanized ones are 18% of the
total in 1990 and 25% in 2012. The rectangle around Lublin is 167×140 pixels, with 9% urban
pixels in 1990 and 16% in 2012. Bologna’s rectangle is 135×124 pixels, and its percentage of
urban pixels is 16% in 1990 and 18% in 2012.

4.1 Batty’s and Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy

The area of each city with its commuting belt is partitioned following two different criteria. The
ﬁrst one corresponds to the administrative boundaries of the municipalities. The second option
is the analogous of the equivalent option introduced for the simulation study in Section 3.1: it
considers concentric sub-areas deﬁned by 5 annuli with the same width, covering the whole area
and centered in the centroid of each main city.

Under the administrative boundary partition, three neighbourhood distances for Karlstr¨om and
Ceccato’s entropy are chosen following the same idea of the simulation study: the 5th percentile,
ﬁrst quartile and median of the distribution of distances among sub-areas. For the concentric area
partition, the three distances are set to include from 1 to 3 neighbouring sub-areas. This way, a
total of six neighbourhood systems are considered for each city with its commuting belt.

In order to compare results, entropies are divided by their maxima indicated in Sections 2.1.1

and 2.1.2.

Insert Table 1 about here

Results in Table 1 show that, for both partitions, Batty’s entropy conﬁrms the EEA country level
sprawl ranking: the area of Lublin is the less sprawled, the highest level is detected for Eind-
hoven and Bologna constitutes an intermediate case. Moreover, Eindhoven can be classiﬁed as
a sprawled city following the reference set of Section 3.1:
its entropy values are greater than
0.985, the relative benchmark corresponding to the decentralized conﬁguration. When introducing
neighbourhood distances for Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy, this ranking is further emphasized,
especially at distances nd1 and nd2 under both the administrative boundary and concentric area
partition. Conversely, extending the neighbourhood to nd3 is less informative in this case study:

13

entropies become similar, without help in detecting urban sprawl. By comparing the results over
time, urban sprawl tends to increase for all cities, especially for Lublin.

4.2 Spatial mutual information and residual entropy

Partial terms of spatial mutual information and residual entropy are computed following the same
two distance options of Section 3.2. In particular, the ﬁrst one sets w1 and w2 to the 4 and 12
nearest neighbour systems, w3 begins at the ﬁnal point of w2 and considers up to 5 pixels along
the cardinal directions, w4 captures all greater distances. For the second option, the 5th, 25th, 50th
percentile of the empirical distribution of distances for each city is used to choose the breaks of the
4 distance classes w1 to w4. All distances refers to pairs of pixels and are measured between pixel
centroids.

Insert Figure 7 about here

Results are summarized in Figure 7, which plots the values of partial spatial mutual information
P I(Z|wk) and partial residual entropies H(Z|wk) for the ﬁrst option. To allow space and time
comparisons, their proportional versions are computed by setting the sum P I(Z|wk) + H(Z|wk)
to 1 at each distance class wk. The ranking of the cities in terms of urban sprawl is more evident in
1990 than in 2012, again aligning with the EEA country results: Eindhoven has a low proportion
of spatial information at all distances, identifying a high sprawl level; Lublin is the least sprawled,
with the highest values of partial spatial information terms. Urban sprawl increases along time,
and the differences in spatial mutual information and residual entropy terms across cities become
almost negligible. The most informative distance classes for detecting urban sprawl are again the
smallest ones. At higher distances, spatial mutual information terms decrease and the sprawl level
is difﬁcult to assess. By considering the distributions for the three scenarios identiﬁed in Section
3.2, at distance w1 the partial mutual information of Lublin belongs to the range of values of a
monocentric city; with the same criterion, Eindhoven has a decentralized conﬁguration; ﬁnally,
Bologna’s partial mutual information is in the lowest tail of the distribution for a polycentric city.
Results for the second distance option (not shown) are not useful to detect and compare the
urban sprawl of the three cities over space and time. Indeed, the partial terms of spatial mutual
information are all very low. This is due to the fact that the most informative distances have already
been declared to be the smallest ones. This cannot be appreciated with the second distance option,
which is not a proper choice for the problem at hand.

5 Concluding remarks

In this work, the approaches proposed by Batty (1976), Karlstr¨om and Ceccato (2002) and Altieri
et al. (2018a) are employed to quantify the level of urban sprawl, i.e.
the chaotic expansion of
cities, and their properties are assessed with a comparative study.

From the theoretical point of view, Batty (1976) and Karlstr¨om and Ceccato (2002)’s approach
represents an interesting proposal because of the LISA-type properties, however it requires a di-
chotomous (or dichotomized) variable, focuses on a single deﬁnition of neighbourhood and is

14

affected by the choice of the area partition. The advantages of spatial mutual information and
spatial residual entropy of Altieri et al. (2018a) lie in the possibility of managing variables with
any number of categories, decomposing the entropy due to space from that due to other sources of
heterogeneity, investigating the global values and the partial terms jointly, to identify the role of
space for different distance ranges.

The comparative study of Section 3 and the application of Section 4 highlight the ability of both
approaches to distinguish among urban patterns and detect urban sprawl. In particular, Batty’s
entropy allows to obtain non overlapping distributions which can be used as a reference set for
classifying sprawl in real studies. Spatial mutual information and residual entropy enrich results
by jointly quantifying in proportional terms the level of urban sprawl at different distance ranges,
and without the need of area partitions. Some conclusive points, according to both approaches,
derive from the case study of Eindhoven, Lublin and Bologna. Firstly, the EEA country ranking in
terms of dispersion of built up areas is reproduced here at a city level: Lublin is the least sprawled,
Bologna has an intermediate level of sprawl and Eindhoven is the most sprawled. Secondly, the
situation of Eindhoven is the most critical, since its entropy values belong to the range of values of
the decentralized pattern. Thirdly, all cities become more affected by the sprawl issue over time,
denoting a negative urban expansion from 1990 to 2012. The selected spatial entropy measures
allow both an absolute classiﬁcation of cities in terms of urban sprawl, and comparison across
space and time via their relative versions. This is a desirable feature of such measures, which
represent a contribution to the diffusion of intuitive, easily interpretable and comparable results
regarding the phenomenon of urban sprawl.

In the study of urban sprawl, the most interesting distances are the smallest ones. At this regard,
spatial mutual information and spatial residual entropy are very ﬂexible, as they can focus on the
most informative distance range to interpret the phenomenon under study. The distance classes
must be suitably proposed according to the context, as shown by the different options checked in
Section 3 and 4. The focus on small distances is not an issue for the set of spatial entropy measure,
as the choice of the classes does not affect the global result; the theoretical framework illustrated
in this paper shows that, when distance classes change, these measures can be easily, rapidly and
intuitively adapted.

When working with data, one should use the ﬁnest available resolution, i.e. points if data are
a point pattern, or the ﬁnest grid provided if data are lattice; this is the case in the present paper.
Pixel aggregation is not recommended unless motivated, as it may reduce precision in the results
and requires expertise in classifying the new pixel according to land use classes.

These well performing measures capture the spatial aspect of the complex phenomenon of
dispersed urbanization; they can be integrated with other indices in order to obtain a comprehensive
quantiﬁcation of sprawl. This helps in focusing on the worst developed areas and contributes
to solving environmental issues such as dangers to ecosystems, forest destruction, pollution and
climate change.

Acknowledgements
This work is developed under the PRIN2015 supported project ’Environmental processes and hu-
man activities: capturing their interactions via statistical methods (EPHASTAT)’ [grant number

15

20154X8K23] funded by MIUR (Italian Ministry of Education, University and Scientiﬁc Re-
search).

References

Altieri, L., D. Cocchi, G. Pezzi, E. Scott, and M. Ventrucci (2014). Urban sprawl scatterplots for

Urban Morphological Zones data. Ecological Indicators 36, 315–323.

Altieri, L., D. Cocchi, and G. Roli (2018a). A new approach to spatial entropy measures. Environ-

mental and Ecological Statistics 25, 95–110.

Altieri, L., D. Cocchi, and G. Roli (2018b). SpatEntropy: Spatial Entropy Measures. R package

version 0.1.0.

Anselin, L. (1995). Local indicators of spatial association - LISA. Geographical Analysis 27,

94–115.

Baddeley, A., E. Rubak, and R. Turner (2015). Spatial Point Patterns: Methodology and Applica-

tions with R. London: Chapman and Hall/CRC Press.

Bart, I. (2010). Urban sprawl and climate change: a statistical exploration of cause and effect, with

policy options for the EU. Land Use Policy 27, 283–292.

Batty, M. (1974). Spatial entropy. Geographical Analysis 6, 1–31.

Batty, M. (1976). Entropy in spatial aggregation. Geographical Analysis 8, 1–21.

Batty, M. (2010). Space, scale, and scaling in entropy maximizing. Geographical Analysis 42,

395–421.

Benﬁeld, F., M. Raimi, and D. Chen (1999). Once there were greenﬁelds: how urban sprawl
is undermining Americas environment, economy and social fabric. Technical report. Natural
Resources Defense Council.

Bhatta, B., S. Saraswati, and D. Bandyopadhyay (2010). Urban sprawl measurement from remote

sensing data. Applied Geography 30, 731–740.

Bivand, R. S., E. Pebesma, and V. Gomez-Rubio (2013). Applied spatial data analysis with R.

Second edition. New York: Springer.

Bondy, J. A. and U. S. R. Murty (2008). Graph Theory. Springer.

Cabral, P., G. Augusto, M. Tewolde, and Y. Araya (2013). Entropy in urban systems. Entropy 15,

5223–5236.

16

Chong, C. H.-S. (2017). Comparison of Spatial Data Types for Urban Sprawl Analysis Using

Shannon’s Entropy. University of Southern California: Dissertation.

Couch, C., L. Leontidu, and G. Petschel-Held (2007). Urban Sprawl in Europe. Landscapes, Land

Use Change & Policy. Oxford, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.

Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas (2006). Elements of Information Theory. Second Edition. Hoboken,

New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

EEA (2006). Urban sprawl in Europe - the ignored challenge. Technical report. EEA Report No

10/2006.

EEA (2011).

Corine land cover 2000 raster data.

Technical report. Downloadable at

http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/ data/corine-land-cover-2000-raster-1.

EEA and FOEN (2016). Urban sprawl in Europe - joint EEA-FOEN report. Technical report. EEA

Report No 11/2016.

Ewing, R. (2008). Characteristics, Causes, and Effects of Sprawl: A Literature Review. Springer,
Boston: In J.M. Marzluff, E. Shulenberger, W. Endlicher, et al. (eds) Urban ecology: an inter-
national perspective on the interaction of humans and nature, 519-535.

Ewing, R. and S. Hamidi (2015). Compactness versus sprawl. A review of recent evidence from

the United States. Journal of Planning Literature 30, 413–432.

Jaeger, J. A. G., R. Bertiller, C. Schwick, and F. Kienast (2010). Suitability criteria for measures

of urban sprawl. Ecological Indicators 28, 427–441.

Jiang, F., S. Liu, H. Yuan, and Q. Zhang (2007). Measuring urban sprawl in Beijing with geospatial

indices. Journal of Geographical Sciences 17, 469–478.

Johnson, M. P. (2001). Environmental impacts of urban sprawl: a survey of the literature and a

proposed research agenda. Environmental and Planning A 33, 717–735.

Karlstr¨om, A. and V. Ceccato (2002). A new information theoretical measure of global and local
spatial association. The Review of Regional Research (Jahrbuch F¨ur Regionalwissenschaft) 22,
13–40.

Leibovici, D. G. (2009). Deﬁning spatial entropy from multivariate distributions of co-
occurrences. Berlin, Springer: In K. S. Hornsby et al. (eds.): COSIT 2009, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science 5756, 392-404.

Leibovici, D. G., C. Claramunt, D. LeGuyader, and D. Brosset (2014). Local and global spatio-
temporal entropy indices based on distance ratios and co-occurrences distributions. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science 28, 1061–1084.

17

Li, H. and J. F. Reynolds (1993). A new contagion index to quantify spatial patterns of landscapes.

Landscape Ecology 8, 155–162.

Liu, Y. and K. Chen (2018). An information entropy-based sensitivity analysis of radar sensing of

rough surface. Remote Sensing 10.

O’Neill, R. V., J. R. Krummel, R. H. Gardner, G. Sugihara, B. Jackson, D. L. DeAngelis, B. T.
Milne, M. G. Turner, B. Zygmunt, S. W. Christensen, V. H. Dale, and R. L. Graham (1988).
Indices of landscape pattern. Landscape Ecology 1, 153–162.

Oueslati, W., S. Alvanides, and G. Garrod (2015). Determinants of urban sprawl in European

cities. Urban studies 52, 1594–1614.

R Core Team (2017). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria:

R Foundation for Statistical Computing.

R´enyi, A. (1961). On Measures of Entropy and Information. University of California Press,
pp 547-561: Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and
Probability.

Rosni, N. and N. Noor (2016). A review of literature on urban sprawl: assessment of factors and

causes. Journal of Architecture, Planning & Construction Management 6, 12–35.

Stone, B. J. (2012). The city and the changing climate: Climate change in the places we live.

Cambridge, MA, USA: Cambridge University Press.

Theil, H. (1972). Statistical Decomposition Analysis. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Torrens, P. (2008). A toolkit for measuring sprawl. Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy 1, 5–36.

Tsai, Y. (2005). Quantifying urban form: compactness versus sprawl. Urban Studies 42, 141–161.

Yeh, A. and X. Li (2001). Measurement and monitoring of urban sprawl in a rapidly growing

region using entropy. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 67, 83–90.

18

Table 1: Results for Batty’s and Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s (KC) entropy with two partition options
Administrative boundary partition

Batty

KC - nd1

KC - nd2

KC - nd3

1990
0.987
0.955
0.980

2012
0.990
0.978
0.983

1990
0.784
0.530
0.766

2012
0.814
0.776
0.804

1990
0.931
0.865
0.869

2012
0.933
0.989
0.881

1990
0.946
0.993
0.935

2012
0.948
0.990
0.937

Concentric area partition

Batty

KC - nd1

KC - nd2

KC - nd3

1990
0.988
0.953
0.976

2012
0.991
0.982
0.982

1990
0.660
0.536
0.594

2012
0.670
0.623
0.640

1990
0.777
0.683
0.683

2012
0.787
0.772
0.778

1990
0.861
0.683
0.683

2012
0.861
0.861
0.861

Eindhoven
Lublin
Bologna

Eindhoven
Lublin
Bologna

19

Figure 1: Examples of the three urban scenarios: monocentric, polycentric, decentralized.

Figure 2: Two options for area partition in Batty’s entropy over an example of monocentric dataset.
Left panel: 20 random areas; right panel: 5 concentric rings.

Figure 3: Results for Batty’s entropy over the three urban scenarios, 1000 simulations, with the
two partition options: 20 random areas (left panel), 5 concentric rings (right panel).

20

as.im(mono.list[[2]], W = win)as.im(poly.list[[7]], W = win)as.im(dec.list[[2]], W = win)lllllllllllllll2.02.53.03.54.04.55.0llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll2.02.53.03.54.04.55.0llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll2.02.53.03.54.04.55.0MonoPolyDecllllllllllllllllllllllllllll2.02.53.03.54.04.55.0llll2.02.53.03.54.04.55.0llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll2.02.53.03.54.04.55.0MonoPolyDecFigure 4: Results for Karlstr¨om and Ceccato’s entropy over the three urban scenarios, 1000 simu-
lations, with the two partition options: 20 random areas (higher panels), 5 concentric rings (lower
panels), at different neighbourhood distances.

Figure 5: Spatial partial information for the three urban scenarios, 1000 simulations. First option
for the distance ranges in the higher panels, second option in the lower panels.

21

llllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0nd1llllllllllllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0MonoPolyDecllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0nd2lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0MonoPolyDeclllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0nd3lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll1.01.52.02.53.0MonoPolyDecIndexkarl.rand[[d]]$monolll0.51.01.5nd1ll0.51.01.5lllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.51.01.5MonoPolyDeclll0.51.01.5nd2ll0.51.01.5llllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.51.01.5MonoPolyDeclll0.51.01.5nd3ll0.51.01.5llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.51.01.5MonoPolyDeclll0.51.01.5nd4ll0.51.01.5lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0.51.01.5MonoPolyDec0.00.20.40.61:(3 * n.dist)MonoPolyDecMonoPolyDecMonoPolyDecMonoPolyDec0.00.20.40.6w10.00.20.40.6w20.00.20.40.6w30.00.20.40.6w40.00.20.40.6MonoPolyDecMonoPolyDecMonoPolyDecMonoPolyDec0.00.20.40.6w10.00.20.40.6w20.00.20.40.6w30.00.20.40.6w4Figure 6: From left to right, Eindhoven, Lublin and Bologna together with their commuting belts,
in 1990 (higher panels) and 2012 (lower panels).

22

Eindhoven 1990Lublin 1990Bologna 1990Eindhoven 2012Lublin 2012Bologna 2012Figure 7: Proportional partial spatial mutual information (grey area) and residual entropy (white
area), for the ﬁrst option. From left to right, Eindhoven, Lublin and Bologna in 1990 (higher
panels) and 2012 (lower panels).

23

w1w2w3w4Eindhoven 19900.00.20.40.60.81.0w1w2w3w4Lublin 19900.00.20.40.60.81.0w1w2w3w4Bologna 19900.00.20.40.60.81.0w1w2w3w4Eindhoven 20120.00.20.40.60.81.0w1w2w3w4Lublin 20120.00.20.40.60.81.0w1w2w3w4Bologna 20120.00.20.40.60.81.0