0
2
0
2

v
o
N
2
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
9
0
1
1
.
1
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

How will AI and automation transform society
and cities?

Gevorg Yeghikyan

Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa
ISTI-CNR
gevorg.yeghikyan@sns.it

Abstract

Against the backdrop of rising anxiety and discussions on the impact
of AI on society, I explore in this article the structural possibilities of
AI and automation triggering a new social conﬂict between the current
capitalist elites and the emerging ”creative class” (R&D scientists, engi-
neers, business developers, etc.), and how this conﬂict can produce social
tensions and transform urban space. By drawing insights from a struc-
turally similar conﬂict in 17-18th century Europe between the aristocracy
and the emerging bourgeoisie, the impact of this conﬂict on the social,
spatial, and power landscapes in cities of that time, as well as current
trends in urban geography, this article outlines the prospects of urban
transformations under changing production and consumption economies.

Keywords— urbanism, class conﬂict, capitalism, urban space

1 The prospects for a new social conﬂict

In his classic work, the Production of Space, Henri Lefebvre argued that “new social
relationships call for a new space, and vice versa.” (Lefebvre and Nicholson-Smith
1991) With all the anxiety and discussions on AI and automation gaining momentum,
the future of production relations, power structures, and social relationships becomes
increasingly uncertain. Hand in hand, as urban theory suggests, so does the future
of cities. To reﬂect on the possible urban futures unleashed by the eﬀects of AI and
automation on the social organization of space, one should ask, following Lefebvre: is a
new social conﬂict structurally possible? The answer to this question might contain the
seeds for ideas about the future of work, social relations, forms of social organization,
and, ultimately, cities.

1.1 Formal vs. real subsumption

So how should we approach this question? One need not be familiar with Marxist
thought to know that capitalist production functions by appropriating the surplus
value created by (social) labour. However, what is interesting regarding the possibility
of a new social conﬂict due to AI and automation, is how capitalism subsumes labor. In
Capital, Marx distinguishes between formal and real subsumption of labour by capital
(Marx 2004). Under formal subsumption, capital exploits labour in socio-economic
terms: the capitalist monopolises the means of production, forcing the worker to yield

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
to the conditions of wage labour, be hired, and give away their added value. Real
subsumption, on the other hand, occurs along with the technological evolution of
capitalist production, under which the worker is dominated by the capitalist not only
by being hired, but also through exploitation by the material movement of capital in
the process of production. He is dominated by the system of machines and becomes a
kind of a living appendix to them, forced to work according to the technological logic
of the machinery he operates, or rather, is operated by. In other words, the worker
is subsumed by capital not only in terms of production relations, but also in terms
of the very production processes he works under. This, according to Marx, is what
makes the domination of labour by capital in organisational and administrative terms,
and hence, the eﬃcient obtaining of maximum surplus value from the employment of
labour, possible. This theoretical framework can be easily extended to post-industrial
economies dominated by services by replacing the machinery logic with, for instance,
the bureaucratic-administrative logic of typical oﬃce work.

What is it that changes in capitalist production with the advent of Industry 4.0
with Machine to Machine, Internet of Things, and AI systems? The worker as an ap-
pendix to the production process essentially disappears, and with it, disappears also
the bundle of manager and supervisor positions telling the worker what to do and how,
since there is no one left to command: algorithms and robots are now at work. Unlike
the disappearing factory or white collar workers, the remaining employees, required
to develop, innovate, and sustain production, such as R&D scientists, engineers, and
business developers, are not working under real subsumption by capital. They are
mainly concerned with intellectual and creative work in which they are operationally
free. Although the external socio-economic conditions are still dictated by capital since
these workers are employed by it (formal subsumption), they are not functionally dom-
inated by capital in the creative process. Moreover, with the capitalist losing leverage
over traditional workers due to automation replacing them, the creative workers gain
further space for operational freedom. Thus, the widespread introduction of Industry
4.0 and AI systems completely or partially abolishes real subsumption in capitalist
production.

Interestingly, this is precisely where space for a new social conﬂict opens up.
While the conﬂict between the traditional industrial worker and the capitalist re-
volved around wages, working hours and conditions, the creative worker is typically
well-paid, enjoys retirement beneﬁts, vacations, and is often even lured by employee
stock options, oﬀering company shares to its employees. Therefore, the conﬂict is to
be found elsewhere.

2 Social climbing in the 17th century and today

To understand the possibilities of the creative class entering into conﬂict with existing
capitalist structures, it is worthwhile to recall a structurally similar socio-economic
conﬂict in history: that between the bourgeoisie and feudal aristocracy in 17th century
Western Europe. Comedies of that epoch show what the emerging bourgeois was
striving for: to make his way to the ruling classes through social climbing. His ascent
from bourgeois to noble might involve marrying a noble woman or buying a noble
title. For example, Moliere’s classic play, titled Le bourgeois gentilhomme, an evident
oxymoron, mocks such attempts of social climbing by the pretentious bourgeois and
ingeniously shows the emerging class conﬂict (Moli`ere 2019).

Likewise, being only formally subsumed by capital and having considerable op-
erational freedom, resources, and time at their disposal, many creative workers
today dream about converting their creative abilities into capital and ap-
plying them with proﬁt - think of the startup ecosystems, - thus liber-
ating themselves from the exploitation of capital and becoming capitalist

2

entrepreneurs themselves. As we can see, this is structurally analogous to the
17-18th century bourgeoisie striving to liberate themselves from the domination of the
monarchic system oﬀering privileges to the aristocracy, by attempting social climb-
ing to become aristocrats themselves. This state of aﬀairs continued for almost two
centuries, until the conﬂict between the ever-stronger bourgeoisie and the ever-weaker
aristocracy ﬁrst manifested itself in the former articulating their diﬀerences from the
latter, and then burst into the violent bourgeois revolution.

2.1 Limits to the growth of the creative class

Coming back to our days, capital still succeeds in keeping the ever-growing creative
class (Florida 2019) in check by oﬀering privileged working conditions and employee
stock options to a still narrow group of creative workers, but it will not be able to
do so indeﬁnitely. Take the example of the so-called Scandinavian Nordic model.
The Nordic model, more than any other capitalist model, took the path of collective
bargaining: a strong compromise between capital and labour, with an unparalleled
level of social guarantees, education and healthcare in the developed part of the world.
For example, unlike the United States where one in ten people live oﬃcially below the
poverty line, poverty in the Scandinavian countries is virtually nonexistent (Semega
2019). Similarly, a situation where a person is denied medical care because they cannot
aﬀord it is essentially impossible in those countries (Sainato 2020). Nevertheless,
the Nordic model has its limits and reached them already in the 1980s when the
portion of GDP redistributed through government spending, i.e., through a non-market
mechanism, reached 65% (Ortiz-Ospina 2016). This meant that capital was forced to
concede the lion’s share of the surplus value it appropriated from labour and allow
it to be redistributed among workers. The Nordic model was unable to go further
with its redistributive policies, since doing so would mean to encroach the very heart
of capitalist production denying it its main motivation: the appropriation of surplus
value. Similarly, given the current growth of the creative class, capital will not be able
to attract and sustain all creative workers, and, given the discussed aspirations of the
latter, the conﬂict will thus be only exacerbated.

Now, whether the discussed conﬂict between the growing creative class and the
current bourgeoisie will culminate in a revolution or will ﬁnd another resolution is not
only diﬃcult to predict, but is secondary and irrelevant here. Of interest is how it can
aﬀect the social, political, and economic organization of urban space.

3 Urban transformations in 19th century France

To understand the prospects of these pending socio-economic transformations shaping
the urban landscape, let’s have a recourse to the French Revolution, and its short and
long term aftermath. Before and immediately after the revolution, in the late 18th
century, the aristocracy, bourgeoisie, artisans, and workers had diﬀerent levels of urban
mobility and use of urban space. Municipal power, exercised by the monarchy and
the aristocracy tightly connected with it, built elaborate public spaces for displaying
power as a performative ritual (Rotenberg 2001): processions of carriages pompously
moved every day along stylised boulevards connecting the various “hˆotel particulier”
to municipal or religious buildings situated in focal squares. Place des Vosges and
Place de la Concorde in Paris are prime examples of such urban spaces. Thus, public
space didn’t exist in the modern sense and merely served as a stage for
celebrating monarchic power. While lower class workers and artisans exercised
minimal mobility staying within the conﬁnes of their neighbourhoods and travelling
almost exclusively by foot, the emerging bourgeoisie was increasingly mobile, agile, and
sought to establish its class identity. Class membership was ﬁrst articulated through

3

literacy, and a new consumer culture such as the emergence of restaurants as a cheaper
way to simulate a private cook that only nobles could enjoy (Spang and Gopnik 2019).
And yet, segregation in cities was mainly vertical rather than horizontal, meaning
that the poor lived on the higher ﬂoors of buildings inhabited by the upper classes
(Chartier, Ladurie, and Quilliet 1998). One could often meet middle class members,
artisanal masters, and lower class workers in the same neighbourhood. This was due
to the initial alliance of reformist middle classes with the relatively well-doing artisanal
classes.

This began to change with the July revolution of 1830, when space started to play
a central role in the creation of middle-class identity following similar processes in
London and Vienna. The noble landowners had overestimated the falling demand for
noble mansion housing, incurring severe losses on investment, and eventually had to
sell the land to private investors. The increasing migration to cities and the ensuing
severe housing crisis, coupled with the socio-economic transformations with a grow-
ing bourgeoisie and its quest for a new identity, compelled private developers to create
and sell an image of a culturally homogeneous, technologically modern, and consumer-
quality neighbourhoods in order to make money on new housing. Private capital thus
subdivided previously aristocratic lands into smaller lots and made possible urban re-
development in speciﬁc areas of the city, meeting the newly formed bourgeois consumer
demand. These new quarters instigated the self-reinforcing horizontal stratiﬁcation of
the city, with rising property values attracting ﬁnancial and banking elites and the
upper middle class, which further nourished consumer culture, already manifest in the
design of new housing blocks.

To distinguish themselves both from the aristocracy and the lower classes, new
kinds of public and private spaces were emerging. This included the appearance of
boudoirs and, most notably, balconies, which, as argued by Francois Loyer, were aimed
at displaying public wealth by “showing the world outside the location and size of
an apartment’s salon” (Loyer 1988). The streets in these new quarters were wider,
straighter, and more luminous, containing more parks and public spaces. The socio-
economic conditions thus shaped a diﬀerent kind of urban space, which made it possible
to experience older areas of the city as well. As Victoria Thompson argued, the
experience of wider streets made older streets seem even narrower, and this came to
be associated with the poor, dark neighbourhoods (Thompson 2003).

This only strengthened segregation in the city, and, given the low urban mobility
of the lower classes and the poor living conditions in such centrally located older parts
of the city as Cit´e in Paris, planted the seeds for social tensions between the poor
and the bourgeoisie for the ﬁrst time. For example, as recounted by Eugene Roche, it
was common belief among the poor in these quarters that the 1832 cholera was a plot
of the rich (sounds familiar?), leading to disregard for social distancing and hygiene
rules, and propelling insurrection, resulting in a mortality rate in the poor quarters
twice as high as the city average (Roch 1832; Jordan 1995).

Bourgeois urban redevelopment, the emergence of what we now call urban master
planning, the Hausmann reconstruction, and rising rents eventually, towards the end of
the 19th century, pushed the poor away from the city center to the city outskirts. Here,
the poor working class lived in badly built, unsanitary housing and environment, from
where the poor did not intrude the rich bourgeois quarters anymore. This concluded
the horizontal segregation process that had begun almost a century earlier.

4 Customizing or segregating urban space

This rather lengthy historical excursion served to delineate the framework for a con-
ceptually similar possible transformation of urban space following the emergence of
the creative class and its conﬂict with the current bourgeois elites. The economic

4

geography for one such transformation model has been described by the urbanist Dror
Poleg in a recent article (Poleg 2020). Poleg starts by recounting the following idea of
Chris Anderson: historically, the entertainment industry was built around producing
and promoting ”hits” because of economic and physical restrictions. The production,
shipping, storing, and displaying CDs or books were expensive, there were not many
cinemas, and there were only 24 hours in a day. This meant that producing a wide
range of albums, books, or movies was not economically viable and hence the industry
was dependent on hits following the Pareto rule: 20% of products made 80% of the
sales (Anderson 2007).

The internet changed this by making the production, distribution and storage of,
and access to content cheaper. Now, most of the sales are no longer coming from a few
hits, but from what Anderson calls the ”long tail” of a multitude of highly customized
products, of interest to a very narrow audience, as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Song popularity vs. sales rank plot diagram. Copyright Dror Poleg.

The sheer quantity of such ”narrow” products creates near-unlimited choice and
constitutes the bulk of most consumer demand. Poleg calls this phenomenon the eco-
nomics of abundance and goes on to link this idea to urban geography. While eco-
nomic scarcity historically produced spatially concentrated population and
economic activity distributions in cities, the emergence of remote working
options is causing population and economic activity to be distributed across
a long tail of many city locations instead of a few spatially concentrated
centers as before. He then notes that under economics of scarcity, the spatially
concentrated urban locations were designed to appeal to the largest number of peo-
ple since they share the same urban infrastructure, centrally located job market, and
public spaces. However, under economics of abundance, people won’t have to share
the same space anymore. City locations could become as customized as the
songs people choose to listen to, making cities even more segregated.

5 So what is at stake?

In the developed world, given the growing ambitions and aspirations of creative work-
ers, gradual and unequal automation can trigger new forms of social organisation of
space following the logic discussed in our historical excursion as well as in the shift of
urban activity to the ”long tail”. In fact, the impact of the growing political relevance
of the creative class on real estate is already palpable in such business models as that
of WeWork. As described in a piece in the Atlantic (WeWork 2018):

”The bespoke spaces are appealing to big organizations because they allow for a
nimble oﬃce experience in which employees aren’t necessarily bound to their desks but
are free to roam and connect with other businesses and entrepreneurs, creating a looser,
more innovative environment in which ideas can sprout.”

Going further, urban segregation on the ”long tail”, for example, can
take the form of a digital divide, but in reverse. With automation bringing

5

low skilled labour wages below the level of subsistence, the unemployed will become
structurally unemployable, and universal basic income (UBI) will most likely become
an imperative policy to sustain this segment of population, making it a class of its own.
This UBI class will be oﬀered basic services in their neighbourhoods and cheap access
to digital services, but will be denied a range of new kinds of physical services like novel
infrastructures serving speciﬁc technologies in transport, logistical, and recreational
activities, as well as quality healthcare and education in customized quarters of the
creative classes. This might create a feedback loop of further investment
in those areas, creating new extraterritorial conditions, pushing the UBI
class away, thus concluding the urban segregation process, just like the
ascending bourgeois pushed low wage workers away to the city outskirts
150 years ago.

Moreover, a certain physical-digital consumer culture of minor luxuries will have to
be facilitated to keep the UBI class entertained within the range of their basic income,
further encouraging this class to customize their neighbourhoods according to that
culture. The closest analogy is perhaps the story of the French general Gallieni who
conquered Madagascar, imposed a head tax in the newly issued local currency in 1901,
eﬀectively printing money and demanding that everyone give some of that money back
to him. Described in detail in David Graeber’s seminal work, this forced the creation
of certain markets and population debt, but was also aimed at nurturing a consumer
culture of cheap luxuries like lipstick or parasol, and making sure locals have some
of their money left to spend on these products (Graeber 2012). It was crucial that
they develop new tastes, habits, and desires; that consumer demand previously alien
to them became ingrained in local culture to keep Madagascar forever tied to France
even after the conquerors had left. Despite the speculative nature of these reﬂections,
they highlight the possibility for social and urban transformations articulated through
extraterritorial conditions and segregation in our cities, as a result of the emerging
structural conﬂict between the creative class and the current capitalist bourgeoisie.

5.1 Hot dog urbanism

One key aspect of our discussion about automation and AI missing so far is that
automation is not taking place uniformly across all levels of production. This con-
sideration is based on Paul Krugman’s hot dog economy toy model (Krugman 2010).
In this model, the economy produces just hot dogs, consisting of two goods, sausages
and bread rolls. Let’s assume that advances in technology allow the bakeries to be
automated, boosting productivity and dropping the cost per bread roll produced. This
cost reduction causes a rise in demand for hot-dogs, other things being equal. But
since automation took place only in bakeries, while sausages continue to be produced
manually, this means that demand for manual labour in the sausage industry will have
to rise to meet the growing hot-dog demand.

So far, the solution has been to tap into cheap labour in the third world. For
example, a technological innovation in Silicon Valley increases productivity in the
upper levels of production but simultaneously raises demand for additional manual
labour in the lower levels of production. Consider that despite automation and AI, the
global workforce has actually doubled in the past decades reaching 3.5 billion people -
faster than population growth (Group 2020). Incidentally, this might also be the reason
why despite the technology being available for quite some time now, corporations
have not been in a hurry to shift to automated production, preferring cheap manual
labour somewhere in Southeast Asia instead. However, unless automation takes place
uniformly across diﬀerent levels of production chains, which it won’t, we might actually
face a workforce shortage, given the limited rural population and the current rates
of urbanization. This means that the above mentioned changes in social structures
and urban life will have an unequal distribution on the global scale with inevitable

6

geopolitical consequences, which is, however, out of the scope of this article.

6 Conclusion

In an attempt to sketch the baseline for how AI and automation could aﬀect social
and urban structures, we looked at concepts from Marx’s political economy, saw what
kind of social conﬂict could emerge with the advent of automation, and looked at
17-19th century France to discover how the mounting socio-economic conﬂict between
the aristocracy and bourgeoisie shaped the urban landscape of Paris and resulted in
segregation in the city. We discussed Dror Poleg’s idea of living on the tail by noting
how it structurally ﬁts the predictions of our model of the social conﬂict between the
creative class and current capitalist elites. We also speculated about the formation
of a structurally unemployable class sustained by universal basic income, the UBI
class, and reﬂected on possible urban transformations as an indispensable part of this
dynamic.

City authorities have traditionally been reactive, but with the advent of the In-
formation age and the disruptive power of AI and automation, policy makers will be
compelled to take a proactive approach to addressing the challenges to the social and
cultural fabric raised by the impact of new technologies on urban space.

This discussed scenario is, no doubt, highly speculative, and the exact form it could
take is impossible to predict, but the aim was to draw attention to the new structural
conﬂict emerging in the current post-industrial capitalist regime and to trigger further
discussions on how it might transform society and urban space.

References

Anderson, Chris (2007). The long tail: How endless choice is creating unlimited

demand. Random House.

Chartier, Roger, Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, and Bernard Quilliet (1998). La
ville des temps modernes: de la Renaissance aux R´evolutions. Vol. 249. Seuil.
Florida, Richard (2019). Maps Reveal Where the Creative Class Is Growing.
url: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-07-09/maps-
reveal-where-the-creative-class-is-growing.

Graeber, David (2012). Debt: The ﬁrst 5000 years. Penguin UK.
Group, The World Bank (2020). Labor force, total. url: https : / / data .

worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.TOTL.IN.

Jordan, David P (1995). Transforming Paris: The Life and Labors of Baron

Haussman. Simon and Schuster.

Krugman, Paul (2010). The accidental theorist: and other dispatches from the

dismal science. WW Norton & Company.

Lefebvre, Henri and Donald Nicholson-Smith (1991). The production of space.

Vol. 142. Oxford Blackwell.

Loyer, Fran¸cois (1988). Paris Nineteenth Century: Architecture and Urbanism.

Abbeville Press.

Marx, Karl (2004). Capital: volume I. Penguin UK.
Moli`ere, Jean-Baptiste (2019). Le bourgeois gentilhomme. BoD-Books on De-

mand.

Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban (2016). “Government Spending”. In: Our World in Data.

https://ourworldindata.org/government-spending.

7

Poleg, Dror (2020). Living on the Tail. url: https://rethinking.re/blog/

living-on-the-tail/.

Roch, Eugene (1832). “Paris malade, 2 vols”. In: Paris: Montardier 33.
Rotenberg, Robert (2001). “Metropolitanism and the Transformation of Urban
Space in Nineteenth-Century Colonial Metropoles”. In: American Anthro-
pologist 103.1, pp. 7–15.

Sainato, Michael (2020). The Americans dying because they can’t aﬀord medical
care. url: https : / / www . theguardian . com / us - news / 2020 / jan / 07 /
americans-healthcare-medical-costs.

Semega, Jessica (2019). Income and Poverty in the United States: 2018. url:
https : / / www . census . gov / library / publications / 2019 / demo / p60 -
266.html#:~:text=The%5C%20official%5C%20poverty%5C%20rate%5C%
20in,14.8%5C%20percent%5C%20to%5C%2011.8%5C%20percent..

Spang, Rebecca L and Adam Gopnik (2019). The Invention of the Restaurant-
Paris and Modern Gastronomic Culture, with a New Preface. Vol. 135. Har-
vard University Press.

Thompson, Victoria E (2003). “Telling “spatial stories”: urban space and bour-
geois identity in early nineteenth-century Paris”. In: The Journal of Modern
History 75.3, pp. 523–556.

WeWork (2018). How can cities succeed in the 21st century? url: https://www.
theatlantic.com/sponsored/wework-2018/focus-on-community/1832/.

8

