3
2
0
2

y
a
M
1
3

]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
3
1
2
0
0
.
6
0
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modelling the multi-scalar effect of commuting on
exposure to diversity

Valentina Marin1,*, Carlos Molinero1, and Elsa Arcaute1

1Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis (CASA) University College London, UK
*corresponding author: v.marin@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

Urban systems are primarily relational. The uneven intensities and distribu-
tion of flows between systems of cities results in hierarchically organised complex
networks of urban exchange. Distinct urban spatial structures reflect the diversity
of functional and social patterns which vary or remain constant across multiple
scales. In this work, we examine the impact of commuting on the potential ac-
cessibility to spatial and social diversity, and the scalar relations that may exist.
We first define relational scales by conducting a process of percolation on the
commuting network, as a hierarchical clustering algorithm. This gives rise to a
nested structure of urban clusters based on flow connectivity. For each cluster at
each scale, we compute measures of commuting structural and social diversity by
examining the spatial distribution of origin-destination pairs, and the distribution
of workers’ skills and occupations. To do this, we make use of global entropy mea-
sures allowing us to quantitatively analyse the reachable diversity across scales.
Applying this methodology to Chile, we observe that the hierarchical accessibility
to the wider system of cities and the patterns of spatial interaction, significantly
influence the degree of exposure to diversity within urban systems. This frame-
work examines connectivity-based diversity at multiple scales, and allows for the
classification of cities and systems of cities according to the spatial and social
dimensions of commuting dispersion. Such insights could contribute to the plan-
ning of infrastructural projects connecting the urban system at different scales,
while also guiding a strategic relocation and redistribution of economic activities
at regional levels.

1 Introduction

Geographic space is not uniform and presents great heterogeneity and spatial diversity.
The elements that make up urban systems, as well as the relationships that keep them
interconnected are unevenly distributed across different locations and scales (Batty
and Longley, 1994; Bretagnolle et al., 2006; Pumain, 2006; Hal´as et al., 2014). This
results in urban spatial structures (Sohn, 2005; Fusco and Caglioni, 2011) with differ-
ent patterns of spatial arrangements and interactions, and varied levels of connectivity
and accessibility, that shape social and economic behaviour with the possibility of in-
stigating social disparities (Maturana Miranda et al., 2012; Burger et al., 2014). Since

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
urban systems are primarily relational in nature, the patterns of spatial interactions
are essential for understanding the complex networks of interdependence and differ-
In this context, the study of flows
entiation between different cities (Batty, 2018).
and exchange between spatial locations can provide valuable knowledge on urban re-
lationships. Flows can take many different forms such as trade, information, social or
commuting networks, each with their own unique structure of organisation, offering a
range of insights into the patterns observed in urban areas (Burger et al., 2014; Hesse,
2011; Fusco and Caglioni, 2011). Within the various functional relationships, commut-
ing networks are particularly important. Their consistent and representative patterns
provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall interactions within and between
cities (Hanson and Pratt, 1988; Clark et al., 2003). Multiple research efforts have been
dedicated to analysing the patterns of home-to-work links, to explain variations in eco-
nomic growth (Goetz et al., 2010), to determine the limits of functional regions (Kropp
and Schwengler, 2016), to examine socio-demographic characteristics (De Montis et al.,
2007; Mar´e and Poot, 2019), to categorise cities by their commuting patterns (Louail
et al., 2015), to investigate the changes in mobility over time (Patuelli et al., 2007;
de Montis et al., 2011; Louail et al., 2014), or to study the transmission of infectious
diseases (Balcan et al., 2009) to name a few. The study of commuting networks also
involve different methods such as: the examination of the networks densities given by
the magnitude of inbound and outbound flows, the examination of trip distances and
times to understand work-related travel costs, the analysis of network connectivity to
identify key locations and their roles, or the assessment of the spatial distribution of
commuting flows given by housing and employment opportunities. In the context of
this paper, we are particularly interested in analysing the distribution of commuting
flows by means of diversity measures. Diversity provides valuable information about
the spatial and social organisational structure of urban systems (Lowe, 1998; Cheng
and Bertolini, 2013; Pappalardo et al., 2016; Marin et al., 2022). From a spatial per-
spective, a diverse commuting network leads to multiple potential interactions between
cities, resulting in increased accessibility and a more integrated and adaptable urban
system (Reggiani and Rietveld, 2010). From a social perspective, labour diversity for
instance, can provide a range of different skills and resources, which could improve the
overall performance and productivity of the system.

By analysing the diversity of flows among origin-destination pairs, key patterns
of dispersion or concentration can be identified, providing insight into the various
typologies of relationships, as well as the relative importance of urban centres and their
roles in the overall functioning of the urban system (Goetz et al., 2010; Burger et al.,
2014). High concentrations of flows in certain destinations can reveal underlying spatial
disparities and high dependency, which can make the entire system overly reliant on
few urban centres. In contrast, diverse origin-destination flows within an urban region
can help distribute the benefits and burdens of economic development and ensure more
equitable access to opportunities, resources and services. Commuting is also related
to social diversity by potentially increasing workers’ exposure to difference (Mar´e and
Poot, 2019). By analysing the distribution of the active population based on their
skills for instance, a better understanding of the uneven spatial distribution of different
population subgroups can be gained. This is especially relevant to study socio-spatial
disparities in regional performance. One key aspect of workers-skills diversity is the
potential for spillovers of knowledge and ideas to occur as individuals come into contact

2

with a wider range of people and places and feed back into their home areas (Goetz
et al., 2010). This can contribute to increased understanding and collaboration among
people from different backgrounds, fostering innovation as well as increased access to
economic mobility.

1.1 Scalar variation

Spatial and social diversity patterns are scale-dependent, meaning they can vary greatly
depending on the scale of observation (Wu, 2004). This is because urban dynamics
are the result of the interplay of various phenomena operating at different scales. The
organisation of elements within a specific geographic location is influenced by local
and internal processes as well as external processes operating at larger regional scales
(Maciejewski and Cumming, 2016; Rozenblat, 2022). Different phenomena may have
different relevant scales, which in turn means that there is no unique scale for de-
scribing spatial or social diversity. (de Montis et al., 2011; Boussauw et al., 2012). A
multi-scalar approach to the structural organisation of urban systems provide a more
comprehensive view of how patterns evolve across different scales.

The scalar variation of the patterns of flow diversity in commuting networks could
be influenced by many factors, such as governmental policies, transportation infras-
tructure, or the distribution of specific industries and populations, leading to different
commuting patterns across scales. For example, commuting can become more diverse
when observing the system at larger scales. At a local level, a city may serve as the
main urban centre in a monocentric area while at a larger scale, it can also engage with
other urban centres that specialise in distinct functions, resulting in a more diverse
and polycentric interaction within the region. On the other hand, commuting patterns
could also remain relatively stable across scales, or change into more concentrated pat-
terns instead. In the latter case, a city may have similar interactions with multiple
cities in a small polycentric area, but be embedded in a larger monocentric region
where a dominant economic centre attracts most intra-regional flows (Lowe, 1998).

In terms of social organisation, variation of patterns in workers skills and occu-
pations at different scales, may be influenced by personal choices and demographic
characteristics, but also by specific urban spatial interaction patterns. At smaller
scales, a diverse economy within a city could lead to a wider range of job opportunities
and a diverse array skills. In contrast, homogeneous industries at a local level result
in a more uniform skillset. As the scale increases, patterns could shift based on the
degree of interdependence among cities and their interaction structures, as well as the
level of specialisation of the other cities within the same region. In regions where cities
have complementary functions and robust exchange, there is often a higher diversity of
skills among workers. In contrast, in regions where cities have similar functions there
may be a tendency for certain industries to dominate and for workers to specialise in
a narrow range of skills.

Understanding scalar variation both upwards and downwards is crucial for decision-
making processes in areas such as transportation planning, economic development, and
equitable distribution of resources and opportunities. Governance must consider the
varying organisational scales and adjust accordingly by embracing a multi-scalar per-

3

spective and a more flexible framework (Anderies et al., 2006; Cumming et al., 2006).
Monocentric organisations evolving into more diverse regional structures, would require
greater collaboration between local administrative units and other entities, through
the creation of mutual agreements, shared facilities, and joint regional programs. In
contrast, as systems become more centralised at larger scales, effective governance is
crucial in managing high levels of dependency, balancing the benefits of centralisation
with the drawbacks of potential risks of reduced diversity and increased vulnerability.

1.2 Defining scales

Defining relevant scales is essential to studying scalar variation in patterns of urban
interaction. The scales of research can impact our understanding of geographical pro-
cesses (Jonas, 2011; Rozenblat and Melancon, 2013b), then, establishing appropriate
spatial scales that aligns with the ones of the phenomena is crucial and presents a
methodological challenge (Montello, 2001; Allen et al., 2014; Walz, 2015). Urban scales
are usually defined by government agencies for administrative, economic, and political
purposes. However, these traditional definitions may not accurately reflect the scales of
urban processes lacking practical significance. Instead, a more accurate representation
of an urban scale can be identified by examining the patterns of interactions between
different spatial units, such as through mobility or socioeconomic relations (Fusco and
Caglioni, 2011; Yin et al., 2017). Rather than viewing cities as isolated entities, this
approach allows cities to be understood as embedded within larger networks of cities
in a national urban hierarchy (Batty and Longley, 1994; Bretagnolle et al., 2006). As
individuals move throughout a territory, certain areas become more interconnected
than others. In this context, scale refers to the spatial extension of processes given
by the intensity of these interactions. By arranging these interactions into successive
scales based on their magnitude, a hierarchical organisation can be discerned, serving
as a basis for multi-scale analysis that acknowledges changes in underlying patterns as
scales shift.

This paper examines the uneven distribution of commuting flows across scales,
resulting in distinct urban structures with varying degrees of exposure to social and
spatial diversity. We apply a percolation process on the commuting network to identify
relevant scales by constructing the hierarchical structure of urban clusters. Then we
compute the cophenetic distance on the hierarchical structure based on the intensity
of relationships between cities in the system. This allows us to investigate how the
scalar accessibility between clusters, may be related to diversity patterns. For each
cluster at each scale, we compute diversity by examining the spatial distribution of
origin-destination pairs as well as the range of workers’ skills and occupations. We
use Shannon’s entropy and a global entropy metric introduced in (Marin et al., 2022).
Finally, we perform a multivariate analysis using all multi-scalar outputs to identify
clusters of closely related systems of cities. Through this process, we are able to
determine structural categories of networks and classify cities and systems of cities
based on the spatial and social dimensions of commuting dispersion.

4

2 Methods

In this study, we examine observed transitions from one scalar pattern to another with
regards to the diversity measures computed to examine spatial and social changes in
commuting networks. The paper implements a methodological framework consisting of
three key stages. First, we aim to retrieve the hierarchical organisation of commuting
patterns to define appropriate scales for analysis. Then, we analyse diversity patterns
of commuting clusters at different scales, taking into account the spatial distribution of
flows and skills levels. Finally, we identify categories of systems of cities based on their
multi-scalar accessibility to diversity, given by the outputs obtained in the previous
measures.

Chile’s unique geography and economic composition provide an interesting case
study for exploring patterns in commuting networks. The long and narrow shape of the
country, coupled with its varied climate, has resulted in diverse economic specialisations
across different cities, leading to distinct commuting patterns and potential for varied
spatial interaction structures. Studying the commuting networks in Chile can provide
insights into how these interactions shape skill diversity and inform the distribution of
economic activities. Additionally, the level of connectivity between cities varies across
the country, with some cities being highly interconnected while others are relatively
isolated. The concentration of economic activity in the capital city of Santiago poses
significant challenges in achieving equitable and sustainable spatial development across
the country.

2.1 Commuting network

To construct the most representative Chilean commuting network we use the 2002
Chilean Census origin-destination matrix, which is the latest census edition containing
origin-destination micro-data. We compared the census dataset with the one extracted
from the National Employment Survey (ENE), a more recent survey with a statisti-
cally representative sample for the years 2015 to 2019. We found that there was a
correspondence of 94% with respect to Census flows origin-destination patterns. The
advantage of using Census data is that it contains more detailed information about
workers’ skills and a much larger sample.
It includes information on the skill level
required for elementary occupations as defined by the International Standard Classi-
fication of Occupations (ISCO), which is used for this analysis (Table 1). The data
is aggregated at the commune level and then mapped to the city level, forming a
network where cities are represented as nodes v and the flows of commuters between
cities represented as directed and weighted links m. The dataset removes commuting
flows that exceed a 3-hour driving duration to provide a more precise assessment of the
strength and consistency of inter-city connections, considering that daily commuting
reflects the typical and repetitive movements between cities. The limit of 3 hours for
driving commuting time across the country is established by the CASEN (National
Socioeconomic Characterisation Survey of Chile).

5

Table 1: Distribution of occupations and skills based on the International
Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) system. The table categorises
the skill levels for different ISCO categories, ranging from basic skills (1) to expert-level
skills (4). Skill levels categorise the level of knowledge and expertise required for an
occupation, based on the complexity and specialisation of the work involved, as well as
the degree of autonomy and responsibility required.

2.2 Commuting hierarchical organisation

We use percolation analysis to retrieve the scalar structure of Chilean commuting
network. Percolation theory is usually used for analysing phase transitions in connected
clusters, which can be used to understand the flow of information within a system
(Gallos et al., 2011). It examines the global structure of connectivity by starting with
disconnected elements and gradually merging them based on a thresholding process
until the largest cluster encompasses the entire system. This approach has been applied
in various fields, including functional brain networks (Gallos et al., 2011), disease
spread (Newman et al., 2002; Gallos et al., 2012), and urban systems (Rozenfeld et al.,
2008, 2011; Fluschnik et al., 2016; Arcaute et al., 2016; Piovani et al., 2017; Behnisch
et al., 2019; Sarkar et al., 2020).
In this study, we implement a similar threshold
procedure as in prior research (Arcaute et al., 2016; Piovani et al., 2017), but applied
to a commuting network. The procedure involves obtaining sub-graphs of connected
links where the weight wij is above a set threshold τ , meaning wij ≥ τ . The link
weights in commuting networks are typically determined by the overall outflow count
(Rabino and Occelli, 1997). However, this paper presents an alternative approach of
defining link weights through a dependence parameter. The parameter is computed
in terms of the magnitude of the flow directed towards a destination in relation to
the total outflows in the origin. This approach allows clusters to be induced not only
by the intensity given by the number of flows, but also by the relative dependency
of the interrelationships holding them together. In order to clarify this, we define a
dependence parameter between two systems based on the out-flows.

• Dependence-based weight:

wij =

tij
j tij

(cid:80)

(1)

where tij is the out-flow from node vi to vj and (cid:80)

j tij is the total out-flow from

6

the origin vi to all possible destinations.

In essence, the dependence parameter aims to quantify the degree to which an
origin node relies on or is connected to a specific destination node. A high dependence
parameter for a destination indicates that a significant fraction of commuters from the
origin commute to that destination, suggesting that the destination holds a relatively
high importance for that particular location. By using the dependence parameter
instead of focusing solely on the total volume of flows between cities, we gain a more
comprehensive understanding of the relative importance of connections between cities,
regardless of their size. When only the total volume of flows is considered, larger cities
naturally tend to exhibit higher strength in their connections, as they have larger
population and therefore generate larger commuter flows. However, this approach
may overlook significant relationships between smaller cities, whose absolute flows are
lower in comparison.

The percolation procedure starts from the threshold τ = 1, by which all existing
links are disconnected, since the maximum dependence weight wij = 1 is not satisfied
in any case. A maximum dependency would suggest that all commuting individuals
within a specific area are required to commute exclusively to one location. As the
threshold decreases, a sequence of percolation transitions takes place, resulting in clus-
ters of links connected by wij ≥ τ . The clusters formed at the initial thresholds exhibit
significant interdependence among their components, which is primarily determined by
a higher dependency parameter rather than a larger count of flows within the network.
A hierarchical structure can be reconstructed by arranging the clusters obtained from
percolation. This is because the clusters are organised in a nested manner, where those
generated with a threshold τ1 are contained within those generated with a following
threshold τ2 (Figure 1). Significant scale transitions can be identified when there are
sudden changes in the size of the giant cluster as the thresholds change (Arcaute et al.,
2016). These discontinuities do not represent actual breaks in the structure, in this
case they rather reflect changes in the strength of interdependencies (Simon, 1962;
Holling, 2001). The thresholds where these changes occur are considered as relevant
scales, that are arranged vertically in a dendrogram structure, with the first thresholds
at the bottom (high dependence) and the final thresholds at the top (low dependence).

2.3 Hierarchical distance

Geographical distance and accessibility play a crucial role in spatial dynamics, but as
argued by (Rozenblat and Melan¸con, 2013a), other distances also prove to be impor-
tant. Measures of proximity between urban areas that don’t rely exclusively on phys-
ical proximity, provide complementary perspectives, expanding our understanding of
systems interactions (Rozenblat, 2022). In this paper, distance refers to a relational
measure that assesses the relationship intensity between cities. Scalar accessibility
relates to the ease of accessing other cities based on its position in the hierarchical
structure determined by its dependencies on each system component. The paper uses
the Cophenetic distance D, a pair-wise distance similarity measure, to calculate scalar
accessibility. It is defined as the threshold at which two terminal clusters ni and nj
(cities in this case) are joined together in the same cluster (Sokal and Rohlf, 1962). D

7

Figure 1: Hierarchical percolation process: a) Toy example of the percolation
process in the network, illustrating cluster formation at various thresholds defined
by the dependence parameter. b) Iterative construction of the dendrogram following
cluster formation, where the maximum threshold τ = 1 corresponds to the terminal
nodes of the structure, and the minimum τ = 0 to the top, where all elements are
clustered together.

is computed for every pair of cities at the terminal level of the dendrogram. A larger
value of D means a higher scalar distance between a pair of cities and a lower potential
for inter-dependencies between them.

2.4 Commuting and skills diversity

We examine diversity in commuting networks from two approaches, one that looks
at the distribution of workers skills, and other that looks at the spatial distribution
of origin-destination flows. For the first one, we use the standard Shannon’s entropy
measure, which from a more ecological approach considers the richness and evenness
of different skills. The more types of skills present (richness) and the more equally
abundant they are (evenness), the less predictable the distribution of skills (Hamilton,
2005; Heip et al., 1998). Thus, when used as a measure of diversity, greater uncertainty
indicates higher diversity. In the second part, we use a measure derived from Shannon
Entropy which is based on an information-theoretic approach to networks (Sol´e and
Valverde, 2004; Wilhelm and Hollunder, 2007; Marin et al., 2022). Diversity in this
context looks at the heterogeneity of the arrangement of links and nodes in the network
of flows. We compute both normalised measures for each cluster at each scale of the
dendrogram, allowing for the comparison of clusters of varying sizes and the assessment
of changes in the patterns as the scale evolves.

8

Skills diversity: We use Shannon entropy to analyse the distribution of workers’
skills within each cluster according to the number of skill categories and its relative
proportion. The entropy outputs can be interpreted as the level of diversity in the
distribution of skills. A high entropy value represents a diverse and evenly distributed
mix of skills, without predominant skill sets. On the other hand, low entropy values
show non-diverse and imbalanced distribution of skills, where certain types are over
or under represented. Workers’ skills are defined by the ISCO classification which is a
standard description of jobs and occupations, categorising them into skill levels based
on required education, training, and experience.

• Global Skills entropy (Shannon, 1948):

HS = −

(cid:88)

pi log pi

(2)

i
where pi is the probability of workers with a particular skill i in the urban area.
To make this measure comparable between urban systems of different sizes we
normalise it by the possible maximum entropy value for a system of that size.
in this case this is obtained by the log of the total number of workers (T ). Then
the normalise skill entropy will be given by HS log(T )

Commuting spatial diversity: The diversity of origin-destination patterns in ur-
ban commuting networks is analysed through the computation of global in-commuting
entropy described in (Marin et al., 2022). This information-theoretic approach pro-
vides insight into the distribution of flows in the network, and the centralisation and
dispersion of urban spatial structure. The global entropy approach considers the in-
terdependence of all network components, where changes in the local patterns impact
the overall network entropy. This measure examines the probability of distribution of
in-commuting flows across all urban units. A skewed probability distribution of flows
results in reduced entropy, characterised by a monocentric pattern due to the concen-
tration of flows in a few dominant areas. On the other hand, an evenly distributed
probability results in higher entropy and uncertainty, exhibiting a polycentric pattern
with a more balanced distribution of importance among urban centres.

• Global in-flow entropy at node level (Marin et al., 2022):
(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

(cid:32)

HC = −

pij

log

pij

(3)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

∀j

∀i

∀i

where (cid:80)
i pij is the probability of in-flow to node vj, considering the sum of
all flows arriving to vj from every possible node vi. To normalise this metric
and make it comparable between systems of different sizes across scales, we use
the log of the maximum possible total number of nodes in a system (N ), then
HC/ log(N ).

2.5 Multi-dimensional analysis

To explore the relation between the different diversity metrics and evaluate their effect
on changes in patterns across multiple scales, we use dimensional reduction techniques

9

on the outputs obtained from these metrics at various thresholds. To do this, we
employ Principal Component Analysis (PCA) that transforms a set of possibly corre-
lated variables into a set of linearly uncorrelated variables called principal components
(Pearson, 1901).
It simplifies the data by reducing its dimensions while preserving
significant information with the first principal component retaining the most informa-
tion and variance. By employing clustering algorithms, such as k-means, we identified
different groups of categories based on the patterns captured by the principal compo-
nents. This enabled us to categorise cities into meaningful groups based on diversity
variance at different scales.

3 Results

In the following section, we applied the methodology to the Chilean commuting net-
work. The results revealed a significant variation in spatial interaction structures of
city systems throughout the territory. This variation is assessed based on the spatial
distribution of flows, the workers’ skillsets and their scalar distances given by different
levels of commuting dependency.

3.1 The scalar organisation of the system’s interdependencies

The heterogeneities of the interactions between the different areas of the urban system
is what creates the regional divisions and more generally, the observed organisation of
the space. The latter can be extracted by observing which areas interact at varying
threshold levels. Starting at the lowest level, one can think of the system as being fully
disconnected. As the threshold moves from τ = 1 to τ = 0, areas start to merge, until
forming a unified cluster that spans the entire territory. During this process, the system
undergoes a series of continuous phase transitions. The multiplicity of transitions is
a signature of a hierarchical organisation. These are traditionally studied by looking
at the sudden changes in size of the giant connected component (Figure 2a). We will
call critical thresholds, the thresholds at which these transitions are observed. These
critical thresholds are then used to construct the dendrogram that displays the relevant
clusters in the relationships between cities and the rest of the territory (Figure 2b).

The dendrogram structure offers a visual representation of the network’s connect-
edness at various scales. Clusters are formed based on commuting flows between cities,
which reflects a degree of dependency for they functioning. In Figure 2b, cities are
at the bottom of the structure representing the terminal clusters ni of the dendro-
gram. We can observe that small systems of cities are formed when the threshold is
at τ = 0.235. From this threshold, the systems of cities display greater variability,
with provincial, regional and other larger forms of organisation clustering at different
thresholds along the country. Cities in the central region of the country, in red and
orange, are clustered in the early thresholds (τ = 0.18 − 0.135), indicating a strong
interdependence. Conversely, the cities on the peripheries, in green, yellow and cyan,
exhibit a slower formation of clusters, joining at final thresholds (τ = 0.10 − 0.07),
showing a relatively weak inter-urban relationship.

10

Figure 2: Hierarchical organisation of Chilean commuting network.
(a)
The plot shows the size of the giant cluster as the percolation threshold increases.
The x-axis represents the threshold value while the y-axis shows the size of the giant
cluster. (b) The dendrogram in the figure represents the resulting clusters at relevant
thresholds, with colours indicating the regions for each city and size indicating the
total flow.

3.2 Scalar Accessibility

The cophenetic distance D between cities in the dendrogram represents their rela-
tive scalar positions given by the strength of urban relationships. A smaller distance
between a pair of cities indicates a stronger interdependence, while a larger distance
indicates a weaker interdependence.

Figure 3a, shows the matrix of hierarchical distances between each city and all
the cities in the system. The diagonal of the matrix displays the smaller hierarchical
distances, where cities with highest interdependence can be identified. A strongly
connected system consisting of cities in the central-north of the country can be seen in
the upper left corner of the matrix. In the opposite corner, another system made up of

11

cities in the central-south can also be recognised, but with greater distances than the
previous case. These two agglomerations can be identified in the dendrogram φ shown
in Figure 2b, at a threshold value of τ = 0.105. The cities located at the extremes of
the country have low scalar distances with only a few cities, while being considerably
distant from the majority of the other cities in the system. Figure 3c, shows the mean
of the cophenetic distances for each city, ordered from north to south. The cities in
the centre of the country have a lower mean scalar distance, which suggests that they
have greater interdependence with the rest of the country. This reflect a high level
of centralisation in the system which have important implications for their role in the
overall economic and social interactions. This important employment hub is centred
around Santiago, the capital, and functions as a crucial node in the network of regional
interactions, underpinning the functioning of the country’s economy, and playing an
important role in facilitating trade and commerce, in addition to connecting people to
jobs and opportunities, and supporting regional and national economic growth. High
interdependence means that changes in these cities, whether due to natural disasters,
economic fluctuations, or other factors, can have far-reaching effects on other regions
and industries. In contrast, the mean hierarchical distance increases towards the more
peripheral and geographically isolated cities. This suggests a lower level of integration
with the national labour market, which could limit their ability to diversify their
economy and access external resources. At the same time, the low interdependence with
the wider system, could provide some isolation from external labour market changes.

Figure 3: Scalar accessibility given the cophenetic distance (D) between cities
in the commuting network. (a) The cophenetic distance matrix between every city.
(b) Toy example of cophenetic distances in a dendrogram.(c) Mean cophenetic distance
of each city, where the x-axis represents the cities ordered north to south, and the y-axis
represents the mean cophenetic value.

12

3.3 Scalar exposure to diversity

This section presents the outcomes of the analysis conducted on commuting and skills
diversity. Specifically, the different entropy metrics for each system are assessed at
relevant thresholds to explore the potential variation on systems exposure to diversity
across different scales.

3.3.1 Commuting diversity HC

We examine the spatial aspects of commuting concentration and dispersion to identify
underlying scalar organisational patterns. Low entropy, reflects low diversity in flow
dispersion, with most flows concentrated in a dominant area, following a monocentric
In contrast, a high entropy reveals a diverse distribution of commuting
structure.
flows, with a more balance importance of cities, following a polycentric logic.

Figure 4 shows the diversity resulting of the HC measure at each commuting cluster.
Findings highlight the different patterns of commuting diversity across scales. Some
systems tend to concentrate their commuting patterns as they merged with other clus-
ters, resulting in decreased diversity at larger scales. Conversely, other systems became
more decentralised, displaying increased diversity. There are other systems with con-
stant levels of commuting diversity with little to no change in patterns across scales.
In Figure 4 a) the main cluster, which initially includes Santiago and gradually assim-
ilates the rest of the clusters at following thresholds, is typically a highly homogeneous
and centralised system. It begins with very low diversity and a monocentric structure
centred on the capital, and after clustering with the Central-south in τ = 0.105, the
pattern becomes slightly more diverse but still maintains a low entropy. Despite this,
this large system is made up of smaller ones with different diversity values. Figure 4b
displays the clusters of commuting networks in the central- south area of the country.
At τ = 0.105, the central-southern system exhibits moderate diversity and is com-
prised of city systems that differ in their spatial structures given the diversity of flows.
For example, the city system with Los Angeles at τ = 0.235 has high diversity and a
polycentric structure, but its diversity decreases on τ = 0.16 after merging with the
system containing Concepci´on. It slightly increases again at τ = 0.135 upon combin-
ing with the system containing Chill´an. Other systems behave differently, the cluster
containing Valdivia, for example, becomes more diverse as the scale increases, whereas
the diversity values of the cluster with Curico remain constant across scales until it
merges with the other cities from the central-southern region.

The diversity of the spatial interaction patterns pose different challenges for plan-
ning and governance. For instance, in a monocentric organisation, policies may need
to balance growth and the dependency on the city centre together with the develop-
ment of surrounding areas. In contrast, in a polycentric system, policies may need to
promote collaboration and coordination among multiple activity centres. Changes in
these patterns can create challenges at different scales, demanding a coordinated effort
for decision-making.

13

Figure 4: Commuting diversity HC across scales. (a) HC for each cluster in
the dendrogram, with colours indicating the ranking of the values, from blue (lowest
value) to red (highest value). The size of each circle represents the flows in each clus-
ter. (b) Commuting network in the central zone of the country at different thresholds,
corresponding to the boxed clusters highlighted in the dendrogram. These plots offer a
visual representation of the commuting flows within each cluster and the changes in
the network structure as the threshold increases.

3.3.2 Skills diversity HS

Measuring the entropy of skills across different levels of organisation can provide valu-
able understanding of how urban clusters develop and their impact on the diversity of
the workforce patterns. High entropy values indicate a diverse range of skills among
workers in the resulting clusters, while low entropy values suggest a less varied and
uneven distribution of skills. When clusters merge and their patterns of skill diversity
are high or complementary, the resulting larger cluster has the potential to increase the
overall skill diversity. In these cases, workers with diverse skills and educational levels

14

are brought together, which can even out the proportion of skills within the cluster. As
a result, the merged entity benefits from a more balanced and comprehensive skill-set.
In the event that workers in one cluster possess skills that are redundant with those in
another cluster, the resulting cluster may have a reduced level of overall diversity due
to an uneven distribution of skills. This scenario may limit opportunities for workers
to interact with individuals who possess different skill-sets.

Figure 5: Skills diversity HS across scales (a) HS for each cluster in the den-
drogram, where results are ordered by colour ranging from blue (lowest value) to red
(highest value). The size of each circle represents the flows in each cluster. (b) Plots
of the commuting network in the central zone of the country at different thresholds,
which correspond to the clusters highlighted in the dendrogram. These plots offer a
visual representation of the commuting flows within each cluster and the changes in
the diversity patterns and the network structure as the threshold increases.

In Figure 5a, the diversity of skills in each cluster within the dendrogram is de-
picted, with the cluster containing the capital city exhibiting the highest entropy lev-
els. As the scale increases, smaller city systems with predominantly low entropy and a

15

high dependency on employment opportunities in Santiago join the cluster led by the
capital, thus increasing their exposure to diversity. The central-southern area of the
country is composed of clusters, that are primarily characterised by medium to high
entropy of skills. Figure 5b shows how the exposure to skills diversity increases for
cities like Chill´an and Los Angeles as they become part of a larger city system with
Concepci´on at the thresholds of τ = 0.16 − 0.135. On the other hand, as the urban
system that includes Valdivia incorporates smaller and more rural towns, its diversity
declines in the following thresholds. Curico maintains a low level of diversity across
these thresholds until it joins a larger cluster at the τ = 0.105

Examining a city in isolation can limit the overall understanding of its functioning,
restrict the identification of diverse skill accessibility, and impede the recognition of
opportunities for collaboration to drive economic growth at both local and larger scales.
For instance, planning strategies for a city with a limited range of skills may require
different approaches depending on the characteristics of the broader system in which
it operates. A city with limited diversity in skills, may have access to a more diverse
regional network, offering a more heterogeneous pool of resources that could potentially
supplement the city’s own limitations in terms of skills and opportunities. If, on the
other hand, this city is part of a region with low diversity or is relatively isolated from
other urban centres, it may be necessary to consider other strategies to acquire the skills
needed for economic growth. These could include developing strong local businesses
and industries that can sustain the local economy, or implementing strategies that
foster stronger inter-exchange on a larger scale.

Figure 6: Variation in diversity metrics per city. The figure displays the diversity
values of cities in a given cluster at different percolation thresholds. The x-axis displays
the percolation thresholds while the y-axis shows the different diversity values. Each
line in the plot represents a city, with highlighted lines added for visual clarity to
demonstrate different patterns. a) shows the commuting diversity HC, while b) shows
the skill diversity HS variation.

As a summary, Figure 6a-b shows the changes in the values of HC and HS for
each city as they evolve and merge across thresholds. In both cases, there are cities
with very dissimilar patterns, suggesting that the level of exposure to diversity can
vary significantly in each case. In some cities, diversity metrics remain stable across
thresholds, while in others there are slight or abrupt changes when moving from local
to larger scales. Since diversity can vary greatly depending on the scale of observation,
planning strategies must be adjusted and refined to address the unique commuting

16

patterns and dynamics of each system of cities across different scales.

3.4 Systems of cities categories

We conduct a principal component analysis (PCA) using a total of 16 variables, 8
from the commuting diversity HC and 8 from the skills diversity HS, each measured
at thresholds ranging from τ = 0.235 to τ = 0.10, see Figure 7. The two principal
components account for 67% of the total variance in the data. Each point in the plot
represents a main city from the systems obtained at threshold τ = 0.235. In general,
the variables are found to be negatively correlated in each of the quadrants of the
plot. Specifically, local and global scales of commuting diversity tend to be negatively
correlated with local and global scales of skills diversity. These results suggest that
cities with high commuting diversity tend to have lower levels of skills diversity, and
vice versa. The PCA outcomes are used for conducting a k-means examination that
identified five city clusters displaying unique scalar behaviours and features. Interest-
ingly, cities are arranged in a manner consistent with their average cophenetic distance
(µD), which is further illustrated by the use of (µD) as a colour code for each city in
the plot. This suggests that the degree of dependence between cities at different scales
is strongly related to their spatial organisation and, consequently, their skill diversity.
The resulting categories can be described as follows:

i ”Northern urban hubs”: Cities of medium to large size, such as Iquique,
Calama, and Copiapo, exhibiting monocentric structures and high skill diversity at a
local scale. Despite being geographically isolated, these cities have diversified and po-
tentially harbor self-sustaining economies. At larger scales, they form more polycentric
regions with limited intercity exchange. As a result, they have the highest hierarchical
distance within the system and a low interdependence at the national level.

ii ”Regional cities”: Cities with structures that tend to be monocentric at smaller
scales but more polycentric at larger scales. They are medium to large-sized cities such
us Concepci´on, Talca and Temuco, and they are well-connected at the national level.
Generally, these cities have a diverse economy with small and medium-sized businesses
in various sectors, enabling them to act as centres for services and commerce for their
regions.

iii ”Southern specialised centres”: Polycentric city systems with low skill
diversity across scales include small to medium-sized cities such as Castro, Osorno,
and Puerto Montt, characterised by highly specialised economies based on agriculture,
fishing, and livestock. These cities exhibit active local exchange, but limited interde-
pendence with larger systems as shown by high hierarchical distances at the national
level.

iv ”Metropolitan urban systems”:

Include two types of systems with the
lowest hierarchical distances in the country: those that include major urban centres
like Santiago or Valparaiso, and small towns that heavily rely on them, such as Alhue,
Quinteros and Talagante. These systems exhibit highly monocentric structures that
persist at larger scales due to the dominance of Santiago and Valparaiso throughout
the country. Although smaller cities in the system have limited local skill diversity,
they gain exposure to greater diversity as they merge with larger cities at the first

17

thresholds.

v ”In-between cities”: Systems that consist of small cities, like Santa Cruz,
San Felipe and Lebu, located in between major urban centres. They exhibit limited
skill diversity at the local level and are dominated by a single economic sector, such
as forestry, wine production, agriculture, or fishing. Despite being part of a local
polycentric system, they are also part of larger monocentric regions, with dominant
urban centres, which means they have exposure to a broader range of skills beyond
their local area.

Figure 7: Distinct categories of urban systems based on commuting and skills
diversity. a) Plot of the first two principal components obtained from a PCA analysis
using HS and HC values at different scales. The plot includes clusters derived from
a k-means analysis of the PCA results. The different categories of cities exhibit dis-
tinct behaviours according to the variation of commuting and skills diversity at various
scales. The colour represents the mean cophenetic distance of the systems of cities,
which shows to be closely related to the resulting categories. In the upper-left corner of
the plot, the different variables are displayed, where, for example, HCτ ↑ corresponds
to a group of variables that belong to the commuting diversity at the upper thresholds.
b) Cities coloured based on the different categories obtained from the analysis.

18

4 Conclusion

This work establishes a framework to identify inter-dependencies at different geograph-
ical scales, that are the result of a heterogeneous availability of jobs and skills provi-
sion. The commuting flows resulting from these matching processes, reveal strongly
connected cities in certain regions, and weaker relationships in others, forming distinct
urban interaction structures with varying skill compositions.

The findings revealed that distinct patterns of spatial interaction can be charac-
terised by diversity metrics based on flow distribution in space and skill diversity levels
among workers. We observed that these measures tend to exhibit inverse or negative
correlations. This outcome offers alternative perspectives on how spatial distribution
and the social composition emerging from urban interaction structures are linked. This
may involve adopting a combination of strategies to balance the upsides and drawbacks
from different patterns to tackle both economic and social needs. For instance, in a
monocentric structure, it may be important to manage the reliance on a single system
due to the high concentration of flows, while also benefiting from enhanced social mo-
bility due to diverse human capital. In contrast, a polycentric structure may require
capitalising on even regional development while managing limited exchange of human
resources due to low skill diversity. Outputs display distinct patterns that vary across
scales of observation. Depending on the thresholds, city systems exhibit different ur-
ban spatial structures and varying levels of exposure to diversity. Then looking only at
a single scale might lead to incomplete or inaccurate conclusions about the dynamics
of the system.

These results enable us to identify cities with similar interaction configurations and
create categories based on their scalar relationships. Interestingly, we found that these
categories are related to the degree of interdependence between cities, as measured
by the hierarchical distance between systems. This means that systems with similar
overall scalar interactions also share similar patterns of flow spatial distribution and
skill composition. This presents a great opportunity for future research to better
understand the underlying dynamics of these and other possible relationships, and
to further explore the potential of the cophenetic distance as a measure of similarity
between urban systems.

While our analysis has focused on daily commuting patterns, including sporadic
flows may provide a different perspective on intercity interactions. Additionally, fu-
ture research could include infrastructure networks, such as transportation and street
networks, to examine how spatial accessibility relates to these measures. The signif-
icance of this analysis ranges from advancing the quantitative understanding of city
systems, to uncovering various types of urban interactions that are relevant for inform-
ing strategic political actions. The findings suggest that there is a need and potential
for creating new forms of governance and planning that adopt a multi-scalar view and
prevent isolating local and regional strategies. Such insights are crucial for unravelling
the complex functioning of urban systems and devising effective strategies to foster
equitable economic growth and social development.

19

References

Allen, C. R., Angeler, D. G., Garmestani, A. S., Gunderson, L. H. and Holling, C. S.

(2014), ‘Panarchy: Theory and Application’, Ecosystems 17(4), 578–589.

Anderies, J. M., Walker, B. H. and Kinzig, A. P. (2006), ‘Fifteen Weddings and a
Funeral: Case Studies and Resilience- based Management’, Ecology and Society
11(1:11).

Arcaute, E., Molinero, C., Hatna, E., Murcio, R., Vargas-Ruiz, C., Masucci, A. P. and
Batty, M. (2016), ‘Cities and regions in Britain through hierarchical percolation’,
Royal Society Open Science 3(4).

Balcan, D., Colizza, V., Gon¸calves, B., Hu, H., Ramasco, J. J. and Vespignani, A.
(2009), ‘Multiscale mobility networks and the spatial spreading of infectious dis-
eases’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(51), 21484–21489.

Batty, M. (2018), Inventing Future Cities, The MIT Press, MIT Press.

URL: https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=zs0StQEACAAJ

Batty, M. and Longley, P. A. (1994), Fractal cities: a geometry of form and function,

Academic press.

Behnisch, M., Schorcht, M., Kriewald, S. and Rybski, D. (2019), ‘Settlement percola-
tion: A study of building connectivity and poles of inaccessibility’, Landscape and
Urban Planning 191(June).

Boussauw, K., Neutens, T. and Witlox, F. (2012), ‘Relationship between Spatial Prox-
imity and Travel-to-Work Distance: The Effect of the Compact City’, Regional
Studies 46(6), 687–706.

Bretagnolle, A., Daud´e, E. and Pumain, D. (2006), ‘From theory to modelling : urban
systems as complex systems’, Cybergeo : Revue europ´eenne de g´eographie / European
journal of geography (335), 1–17.
URL: https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00156778/

Burger, M. J., van der Knaap, B. and Wall, R. S. (2014), ‘Polycentricity and the

Multiplexity of Urban Networks’, European Planning Studies 22(4), 816–840.

Cheng, J. and Bertolini, L. (2013), ‘Measuring urban job accessibility with distance
decay, competition and diversity’, Journal of Transport Geography 30, 100–109.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.03.005

Clark, W. A., Huang, Y. and Withers, S. (2003), ‘Does commuting distance mat-
ter?: Commuting tolerance and residential change’, Regional Science and Urban
Economics 33(2), 199–221.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166046202000121

Cumming, G. S., Cumming, D. H. M. and Redman, C. L. (2006), ‘Scale Mismatches
in Social-Ecological Systems: Causes, Consequences, and Solutions’, Ecology and
Society 11(1), art14.
URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss1/art14/

20

De Montis, A., Barth´elemy, M., Chessa, A. and Vespignani, A. (2007), ‘The structure
of interurban traffic: a weighted network analysis’, Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design 34(5), 905–924.

de Montis, A., Caschili, S. and Chessa, A. (2011), ‘Time evolution of complex networks:
Commuting systems in insular Italy’, Journal of Geographical Systems 13(1), 49–65.

Fluschnik, T., Kriewald, S., Ros, A. G. C., Zhou, B., Reusser, D. E., Kropp, J. P.
and Rybski, D. (2016), ‘The size distribution, scaling properties and spatial orga-
nization of urban clusters: A global and regional percolation perspective’, ISPRS
International Journal of Geo-Information 5(7), 1–14.

Fusco, G. and Caglioni, M. (2011), ‘Hierarchical clustering through spatial interac-
tion data. The case of commuting flows in south-eastern France’, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 6782 LNCS(PART 1), 135–151.

Gallos, L. K., Barttfeld, P., Havlin, S., Sigman, M. and Makse, H. A. (2012), ‘Collective

behavior in the spatial spreading of obesity’, Scientific Reports 2, 1–9.

Gallos, L. K., Makse, H. A. and Sigman, M. (2011), ‘A small-world of weak ties
integration of self-similar modules in functional brain

provides optimal global
networks’, 109(8), 2825–2830.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.0604%0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1106612109

Goetz, S. J., Han, Y., Findeis, J. L. and Brasier, K. J. (2010), ‘U.S. commuting
networks and economic growth: Measurement and implications for spatial policy’,
Growth and Change 41(2), 276–302.

Hal´as, M., Klapka, P. and Kladivo, P. (2014), ‘Distance-decay functions for daily

travel-to-work flows’, Journal of Transport Geography 35, 107–119.

Hamilton, A. J. (2005), ‘Species diversity or biodiversity?’, Journal of environmental

Management 75(1), 89–92.

Hanson, S. and Pratt, G. (1988), ‘Reconceptualizing the links between home and work

in urban geography’, Economic Geography 64(4), 299–321.

Heip, C., Herman, P. and Soetaert, K. (1998), ‘Indices of diversity and evenness’,

Oceanis 24(4), 61–88.

Hesse, M. (2011),

‘Cities, Material Flows and the Geography of Spatial Interac-
tion: Urban Places in the System of Chains’, Commodity Chains and World Cities
1(2010), 91–110.

Holling, C. S. (2001), ‘Understanding the Complexity of Economic, Ecological, and

Social Systems’, Ecosystems 4(5), 390–405.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-001-0101-5

Jonas, A. E. G. (2011), Scale and Networks, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, chapter 27,

pp. 387–403.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781444395839.ch27

21

Kropp, P. and Schwengler, B. (2016), ‘Three-Step Method for Delineating Functional

Labour Market Regions’, Regional Studies 50(3), 429–445.

Louail, T., Lenormand, M., Cantu Ros, O. G., Picornell, M., Herranz, R., Frias-
Martinez, E., Ramasco, J. J. and Barthelemy, M. (2014), ‘From mobile phone data
to the spatial structure of cities’, Scientific Reports 4, 1–12.

Louail, T., Lenormand, M., Picornell, M., Cant´u, O. G., Herranz, R., Frias-Martinez,
E., Ramasco, J. J. and Barthelemy, M. (2015), ‘Uncovering the spatial structure of
mobility networks’, Nature communications 6(1), 1–8.

Lowe, J. C. (1998), ‘Patterns of spatial dispersion in metropolitan commuting’, Urban

Geography 19(3), 232–253.

Maciejewski, K. and Cumming, G. S. (2016), ‘Multi-scale network analysis shows scale-
dependency of significance of individual protected areas for connectivity’, Landscape
Ecology 31(4), 761–774.

Mar´e, D. C. and Poot, J. (2019), ‘Commuting to Diversity’, SSRN Electronic Journal

(November).

Marin, V., Molinero, C. and Arcaute, E. (2022), ‘Uncovering structural diversity in
commuting networks: global and local entropy’, Scientific Reports 12(1), 1–13.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-05556-6

Maturana Miranda, F., Vial Cossani, C. and David Poblete L´opez, M. (2012), ‘Las
Ciudades Y La Interacci´on Espacial, An´alisis Exploratorio Para Los Centros Urbanos
Del Sur De Chile’, Nadir: Revista electronica de geografia austral 4(1), 10–18.

Montello, D. (2001), ‘Scale in Geography’, International Encyclopedia of the Social &

Behavioral Sciences (1997), 13501–13504.

Newman, M. E. J., Jensen, I. and Ziff, R. M. (2002), ‘Percolation and epidemics in
a two-dimensional small world’, Physical review. E, Statistical, nonlinear, and soft
matter physics 65(2), 021904.

Pappalardo, L., Vanhoof, M., Gabrielli, L., Smoreda, Z., Pedreschi, D. and Giannotti,
F. (2016), ‘An analytical framework to nowcast well-being using mobile phone data’,
International Journal of Data Science and Analytics 2(1), 75–92.

Patuelli, R., Reggiani, A., Gorman, S. P., Nijkamp, P. and Bade, F.-J. (2007), ‘Net-
work analysis of commuting flows: A comparative static approach to german data’,
Networks and Spatial Economics 7(4), 315–331.

Pearson, K. (1901), ‘Liii. on lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space’,
The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin philosophical magazine and journal of science
2(11), 559–572.

Piovani, D., Molinero, C. and Wilson, A. (2017), ‘Urban retail location: Insights from

percolation theory and spatial interaction modeling’, PLoS ONE 12(10).

Pumain, D. (2006), Alternative explanations of hierarchical differentiation in urban
systems, in ‘Hierarchy in Natural and Social Sciences, 169-222.’, pp. Chapter 7,169–
222.

22

Rabino, G. A. and Occelli, S. (1997), ‘Understanding spatial structure from network

data : theoretical considerations and applications’, Cybergeo pp. 1–21.
URL: http://journals.openedition.org/cybergeo/2199

Reggiani, A. and Rietveld, P. (2010), ‘[Guest editorial] Networks, commuting and
spatial structures: An introduction’, Journal of Transport and Land Use 2(3), 1–4.

Rozenblat, C. (2022), Cities’ systems and networks’ proximities: toward a multiplex
approach, in ‘Handbook of Proximity Relations’, Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 1–26.
URL: https://www.elgaronline.com/view/edcoll/9781786434777/9781786434777.00018.xml

Rozenblat, C. and Melan¸con, G. (2013a), ‘A small world perspective on urban sys-
tems’, Methods for Multilevel Analysis and Visualisation of Geographical Networks
(May), 19–32.

Rozenblat, C. and Melancon, G. (2013b), Introduction, in ‘Methods for Multilevel
Analysis and Visualisation of Geographical Networks’, Springer Netherlands, Dor-
drecht, pp. 1–15.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-94-007-6677-81

Rozenfeld, H. D., Rybski, D., Andrade, J. S., Batty, M., Stanley, H. E. and Makse,
H. A. (2008), ‘Laws of population growth’, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 105(48), 18702–18707.

Rozenfeld, H. D., Rybski, D., Gabaix, X. and Makse, H. A. (2011), ‘The area and
population of cities: New insights from a different perspective on cities’, American
Economic Review 101(5), 2205–2225.

Sarkar, S., Wu, H. and Levinson, D. M. (2020), ‘Measuring polycentricity via network

flows, spatial interaction and percolation’, Urban Studies 57(12), 2402–2422.

Shannon, C. E. (1948), ‘A mathematical theory of communication’, The Bell System

Technical Journal 27(3), 379–423.

Simon, H. A. (1962), ‘The Architecture of Complexity’, Proceedings of the American

Philosophical Society 106(6), 467–482.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0205649

Sohn, J. (2005), ‘Are commuting patterns a good indicator of urban spatial structure?’,

Journal of Transport Geography 13(4), 306–317.

Sokal, R. R. and Rohlf, F. J. (1962), ‘The comparison of dendrograms by objective

methods’, TAXON 11(2), 33–40.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.2307/1217208

Sol´e, R. V. and Valverde, S. (2004), Information theory of complex networks: on
evolution and architectural constraints, in ‘Complex Networks’, Springer, pp. 189–
207.

Walz, U. (2015), ‘Indicators to monitor the structural diversity of landscapes’, Ecolog-

ical Modelling 295, 88–106.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2014.07.011

23

Wilhelm, T. and Hollunder, J. (2007), ‘Information theoretic description of networks’,

Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 385(1), 385–396.

Wu, J. (2004), ‘Effects of changing scale on landscape pattern analysis: Scaling rela-

tions’, Landscape Ecology 19(2), 125–138.

Yin, J., Soliman, A., Yin, D. and Wang, S. (2017), ‘Depicting urban boundaries from
a mobility network of spatial interactions: a case study of Great Britain with geo-
located Twitter data’, International Journal of Geographical Information Science
31(7), 1293–1313.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2017.1282615

Acknowledgements

VM thanks The National Research and Development Agency (ANID) for the financial
support provided as a PhD scholarship ”Becas Chile”.

Author contributions statement

VM developed the theoretical framework, designed the experiments and conducted the
analysis. CM and EA contributed to the theoretical framework. VM wrote the paper,
and all authors contributed to the structure and fine tuning of the manuscript.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

24

