4
2
0
2

l
u
J

9
2

]

N
G
.
n
o
c
e
[

1
v
2
6
7
9
1
.
7
0
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Redefining Urban Centrality: Integrating Economic Complexity
Indices into Central Place Theory

Jonghyun Kima, Donghyeon Yua,b,c, Hyoji Choia, Dongwoo Seoa,b, Bogang Juna,c,d,∗

aResearch Center for Small Businesses Ecosystem, Inha University, Incheon 22212, South Korea
bDepartment of Statistics, Inha University, Incheon 22212, South Korea
cDepartment of Data Science, Inha University, Incheon 22212, South Korea
dDepartment of Economics, Inha University, Incheon 22212, South Korea

Abstract

This study introduces a metric designed to measure urban structures through the economic com-

plexity lens, building on the foundational theories of urban spatial structure, the Central Place

Theory (CPT) (Christaller, 1933). Despite the significant contribution in the field of urban studies

and geography, CPT has limited in suggesting an index that captures its key ideas. By analyzing
various urban big data of Seoul, we demonstrate that PCI and ECI effectively identify the key

ideas of CPT, capturing the spatial structure of a city that associated with the distribution of eco-

nomic activities, infrastructure, and market orientation in line with the CPT. These metrics for
urban centrality offer a modern approach to understanding the Central Place Theory and tool for

urban planning and regional economic strategies without privacy issues.

Keywords: Complexity, Central Place Theory, Market Boundary

1. Introduction

Understanding the dynamic nature of urban structures is crucial for elucidating the economies
of a city and for implementing effective urban planning policies. The urban areas have trans-

formed their structure ceaselessly. The structure, for example, co-evolved with the introduction

of new transportation and logistics systems, such as railways in the 19th century and automobiles

in the early 20th century, along with the emergence of new industries (Anas et al., 1998). These

transformations underscore the critical need to comprehend the underlying spatial structures, as

these structures are associated with the distribution of economic activities, infrastructure, and

∗Corresponding: bogang.jun@inha.ac.kr

Preprint submitted to arXiv

July 30, 2024

 
 
 
 
 
 
market orientations—key components in urban planning and regional economic strategies. To

keep pace with these evolutionary changes, it is imperative to develop metrics that can accu-

rately measure and reflect the current status of a region’s urban structure.

This study introduces a metric designed to measure urban structures through the economic

complexity lens, building on the foundational theories of urban spatial structure, particularly

Central Place Theory (CPT) (Christaller, 1933). Proposed by Walter Christaller in the 1930s,
CPT has significantly influenced the field of urban studies and geography by offering a novel per-

spective on how central functions are distributed across an urban landscape, driven by consumer

behavior and market forces. According to Christaller, settlements are organized in a hierarchical

manner where central places fulfill specific roles by providing goods and services, which in turn

shape the geographical and economic context, and, recursively, are shaped by the context. While

Christaller’s CPT is well-known for its hexagonal market boundaries, his primary focus was, in

fact, on the interaction between product centrality and location assuming a homogeneous space

and uniformly distributed consumers (Pacione, 2009). Over the decades, CPT has provided an

analytical framework for understanding the clustering of economic activities, particularly in retail

trade and service industries, and has profoundly influenced urban and regional planning (Mul-

ligan et al., 2012; Bunge, 1962; Boussauw et al., 2014; Dale and Sjøholt, 2007; Neal, 2011;

Shearmur and Doloreux, 2015).

The incorporation of big data and advanced analytical techniques in recent years has rein-

vigorated CPT, allowing researchers to explore the theory’s micro-foundations through detailed
data analysis, thus reaffirming its relevance in contemporary urban studies. Van Meeteren and

Poorthuis (2018), for example, show the relationship between threshold and range of goods and

the various central functions for the case of Louisville, Kentucky, by using Twitter data, confirm-

ing the micro-foundation of CPT. Kii et al. (2023) estimate the urban spatial structure based on

remote sensing data of Tokyo, Japan, by estimating trip attraction. These researches have opened

pathways to reconsider the main idea of CPT in the new light of the emergence of big data. Al-

though the literature shows the applicability of CPT with big data, it is limited in developing a

universal metric for CPT that highlights on a region and a product in terms of centrality. More-

over, literature tends to focus on the hexagonal configuration itself, rather than the interaction

between the products and the locations that was a key emphasis of Christaller.

To suggest a metric for the universal measure of the centrality of products and locations,

2

Figure 1. Similarity of definitions between the Central Place theory (Christaller, 1933) and the
Economic Complexity (Hidalgo and Hausmann, 2009)

this study revisits the core principles of CPT, with more paying attention to the interaction be-

tween the the characteristics of goods and services, and the location that provides the goods and

services. When we focus on this fundamental aspect of CPT, which is the recursive interaction

between the centrality of products and places, we can find the resemblance of CPT to the concept

of economic complexity as depicted in Figure 1.

The concept of economic complexity was introduced by Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009). In

their seminal work, they derived two metrics, which are the Product Complexity Index(PCI)

and the Economic Complexity Index(ECI), by looking at world trade data. The two complex-

ity metrics show the recursive structure in their definition: a country with a high complexity

measured by ECI is the country that produces complex products, while a product with a high

complexity measured by PCI is the product that is produced in a country with high complexity.

Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009) derived the PCI and ECI by solving the eigenvalue problem of

the recursive equations. Thanks to the flexibility and applicability of two metrics, ECI and PCI,

it has become popular tools in economic geography, international development, and innovation

studies (Hidalgo, 2021).

In this work, we suggest a more universal way of measuring the centrality of products and lo-

cations in a city by combining the theoretical framework by Christaller and recent advancements

in the field of Economic Complexity (Hidalgo and Hausmann, 2009; Hidalgo, 2021). We aim to

show how the ECI and PCI reveal the urban structure in Seoul, which is a megacity, combining

various big data, such as data on all the geo-locations of small businesses in Seoul; residential,

labor, and floating population data; and credit card data with high spatial resolutions. Specifi-

cally, our new measures for the centrality of products and places, PCI of a product and ECI of a

3

region, are calculated by using data on the geo-location of small businesses, which can be free

from privacy issues so that it can be applied for the other cities easily.

2. Results

Detecting the spatial unit of analysis

To explore the ECI and PCI of an urban area, we look at Seoul, which is a megacity, exhibiting

a gross regional domestic product (GRDP) of $3, 739 million (20% of all GDP) and involving

2,860,562 households, 823,624 firms, 5,226,997 workers and 9,662,041 residents in 2019. Then,

based on the location data of the small businesses shops, we define the spatial unit of analysis.

While administrative districts are often used as a spatial unit of analysis, this administrative

boundary within the city level does not determine consumption behavior. Therefore, we define

the spatial unit of analysis based on data showing how the small businesses are located (Hidalgo

et al., 2020; Jun et al., 2022), resulting in 523 amenity clusters, whose average radius is 241

meters. The following analysis is based on this detected spatial unit of analysis that is depicted

with polygons in Figure 3.

The optimal distance among markets over products

We investigate the relationship between PCI and the spatial range of the market, using PCI

in two ways. One focuses on products and services and examines their market boundaries–

which reflect Christaller’s concept of the demand threshold, the minimum number of customers

necessary for a central function to exist–by using the location data of all the small businesses in

Seoul. The demand threshold is captured by the minimum distance among markets of a product.

The other approach focuses on consumer behavior by using credit card data, by looking at how
the distance between consumers’ residential area and their places of their consumption differs

over products. This reflects the maximum distance that a consumer is willing to travel to obtain a

central function (the range in Christaller’s concept). We construct two empirical models, which

are Equation (1) and (2), to investigate economic-geographical characteristics of central place

goods and central places in terms of the PCI and ECI.

First, the demand threshold in Christaller’s idea is captured by the minimum distance among

markets of a product. To calculate the minimum distance among markets, we start with calcu-
lating Revealed Comparative Advantage of product p in cluster i (RCA = shopscp/ (cid:80)
c shopscp/ (cid:80)

p shopscp
cp shopscp

) by

(cid:80)

4

looking at the number of shops in the cluster, shopscp, and figure out whether a product in a clus-

ter has the comparative advantage (Balassa, 1965). RCAcp is greater or equal to 1 when the share

of production of cluster on a given product p is larger than the share of that product on the entire

city. When RCAcp is greater or equal to 1, we regard the market of product p exists in cluster c.

Then, we look at the distance between every pairs of the market and pick the minimum distance

among them. That is the minimum distance between clusters for a product p, Distp,c,c′ , which is

our dependent variable. We construct the empirical specification in Equation (1) to investigate

the spatial range of market by each product:

Distp,c,c′ = β0 + β1PCIp + β2∆ECIc,c′ + β3∆Diversityc,c′ + B · X

+ µlocation + µindustry + εp,c,c′

(1)

where the dependent variable, Distp,c.c′ , is the minimum distance between two spatial units that

shows comparative advantages in product p. Our variable of interests is the product complexity,
PCIp. We also control for the difference in economic complexity of two spatial units, ∆ECIc,c′ ,
and product diversity, ∆Diversityc,c′ . B · X includes other control variables, such as the demo-
graphic characteristics, difference in labor, floating, and residential population in thousands of
people, and the difference in land price between the spatial units. Additionally, we add vectors
of dummy variables to control location-specific and industry-specific fixed effects and εp,c,c′ is
the error term 1. The result is depicted in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1.

Before moving to the second empirical specification, we visualize our result on the relation-

ship between the market boundaries of products and their PCI as shown in Figure 2. Figure 2 (A)

is the conceptual framework suggested by Christaller (1933). He argues that the spatial config-

uration of a city depends on the centrality of places. In turn, central places are those providing

products and services with high centrality according to the iterative structure of his argument.
Based on Christaller’s idea, we can draw the schematic market boundary of different products as

depicted in Figure 2 (B). This shows that the more central products are likely to have a longer

distance between the markets. As expected by the conceptual framework of Christaller (1933),

Figure 2 (C) shows that the more complex product, which corresponds with the higher central-

1The administrative district dummy variable was measured at the ward level gu, which is an intermediate step in the
city’s administrative division. The dummy variable for industry classification is measured at the highest level, with a
total of nine classifications.

5

Figure 2. Market boundaries over the level of PCI. (A) Hexagonal configuration the product
centrality and (B) schematic market boundaries over different products suggested by Christaller
(1933). (C) Calculated market boundaries of convenience store (PCI = 0.26, average market
distance = 0.8 km), Second handed luxury goods (PCI = 0.46, average market distance = 1.6
km), and Diamond trader shop (PCI = 0.84, average market distance = 2.9 km). Black dots
represent the centers of small business clusters that exhibit the comparative advantage of the
product.

ity, tends to exhibit the larger market boundary. For example, in the case of convenience stores,

which have lower centrality, the average distance among the market is 0.8 km, and its product

complexity is 0.26. In contrast, diamond trader shops, which have higher centrality, have a long

market distance, which is 2.9 km, with a PCI of 0.84. Although the spatial configuration is not

the exact hexagonal shape as the conceptual framework expected in Figure 2 (A) and (B), which

is based on the assumption with homogeneous space and uniformly distributed consumer, our

results show the materialized world of the idea.

Next, we construct the second empirical specification, Equation (2), to explore relationships

between consumer’s purchasing mobility and the product centrality measured by PCI. Because

of privacy issue, tracking individual consumer’s purchasing behavior is impossible using our

data. Instead, given information aggregated by purchasing and residential location, and the de-

mographic information on consumers, we constructed consumer group i by looking at their age

(aggregated by 10s), gender, purchasing and residential location based on 50m × 50m cell units.

Our empirical specification to see the purchasing behavior of consumer group i for product p is

6

following:

Disti,d = β0 + β1PCIp + β2Counti,d + β3Femalei + B · X

+ µlocation + µindustry + εi,p

(2)

where the dependent variable, Disti,p, is the travel distance of consumers group i, who purchase

goods of product type p in a region from their residential area. Our main variable of interest

is again product complexity PCIp, while Counti,p is the aggregated purchase count for product

p by consumer group i. Femalei is a binary indicator of consumers’ gender that takes 1 if

consumers are female and 0 otherwise. B · X includes demographic controls, such as age groups
of consumers. We also add the location and industry fixed effects, which are µlocation and µindustry,

to control for the time-invariant characteristics of consumers’ residential location and the industry

field of the goods2. εp,o is the error term. The result is depicted in Column (3) and (4) of Table 1.

As reported in Table 1, a high PCI product is likely to have a broader market boundary,

pulling consumers from a further distance. In Columns (1) and (2), the PCI is significantly and

positively correlated with the minimum distance between two markets of product p. Since the
ECI and PCI are normalized, the coefficients of PCIp in Columns (1) and (2) indicate that the

minimum distance between markets is, on average, 0.297- 0.324 km further apart when the PCI
value increases 1 unit of standard deviation. The difference between the case of minimum and

maximum PCI is 2.1-2.3 kilometers further apart.

Column (3) and (4) of Table 1 shows the second results that are associated with the empirical

specification of Equation 2. Again, the dependent variable is the distance between the consumers’

residential area and their consumption places. As shown in Columns (3) and (4), a product with

a higher PCI is likely to be purchased by consumers who are visiting the market from longer
apart. Interestingly, as shown by the positive and significant coefficient of Femalei, the mobility

of female consumers is higher than that of male consumers. The results in Columns (3) and (4) of

Table 1 show that on average, consumers travel 8.9 – 9.2 km further to purchase the more complex

product (or service), when the PCI of the product increases 1 unit of standard deviation, and as

suggested Christaller (1933), the higher centrality goods measured by the PCI are associated with

2The administrative district dummy variable was measured at the ward level gu, which is an intermediate step in the
city’s administrative division. The dummy variable for industry classification is measured at the highest level, with a
total of nine classifications.

7

Table 1. Relationship between the market boundary and the PCI of products

Market boundary focusing on product

Market boundary focusing on consumer’s behavior

(3)
8.942∗∗∗
(0.011)

(4)
9.228∗∗∗
(0.011)

(1)
2.272∗∗∗
(0.092)

PCIp

∆ECIc,c′

∆Dc,c′

Counti,d

Femalei

Demographics controls

Land price controls

FEindustry

FElocation

FEconsumerage

✓

✓

✓

✓

(2)
2.082∗∗
(0.089)

0.583∗∗∗
(0.069)

0.001∗∗∗
(0.0005)

✓

✓

✓

✓

0.195∗∗∗
(0.004)

✓

✓

✓

✓

−0.388∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.098∗∗∗
(0.004)

✓

✓

✓

✓

4,201,653
0.294
0.294
4.155
41,569.570∗∗∗

Observations
R2
Adjusted R2
Residual Std. Error
F Statistic

Note:

22,215
0.220
0.201
0.9156
11.169∗∗∗

22,215
0.274
0.256
0.883
14.768∗∗∗

4,201,653
0.277
0.277
4.200
39,316.160∗∗∗

∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01

the longer boundary of the market of the product.

Economic complexity of a region reveals the central place of a city

We visualize ECI for each spatial unit in Seoul in Figure 3. Although we calculate the ECI

by just looking at the locations of small businesses’ shops in a city, interestingly, the result shows

that high ECI regions, which are in red, are mostly well-known place for city’s economically and

politically central functions. For example, spatial units labelled H1 in Figure 3, primarily include

the headquarters of major conglomerates or big companies. In these area, which has high ECI,
complex products and services are more likely to provided/traded, as suggested by Christaller

(1933). Likewise, other clusters with high ECI, which are in red, are also responsible for central

function of city Seoul: regions labelled H2 include Seoul city hall and leading media companies,

those with H3 are university town areas, those with H4 are financial hub in nation, those with
8

Figure 3. Economic complexity of amenity clusters in Seoul. Amenity clusters with high,
medium, and low level of ECI are in red, gray, and blue, respectively.

H5 are the small businesses’ cluster of small electronic shops in Yongsan, and those with H6 are

the area where are the hub of foreign cultures or expensive amenity goods in Iteawon. Other

regions with high ECI with yellow boxes are located in relatively peripheral area in Seoul but

they are also serve for central city function with including central facilities, such as domestic

airport, science park, cluster of private academies, enterprise zone for ICT companies, central
market of agricultural and marine product in a country, administrative office of sub-district of
Seoul, a central express bus terminal, amusement park, market for office supplies, and logistics

& distribution hub. As demonstrated previously, the spatial concentration of economically and

functionally important facilities on high ECI regions.

Further, focusing of production side, we explore another spatial concentration on the high

ECI regions, since according to Christaller (1933), not only do central places play a crucial role

in consumption, but they are also pivotal in production. To examine this assertion, we analyzed

the spatial concentration patterns of the labor force and potential consumers in Seoul by visual-

izing the number of labor, floating, and residential populations within the city’s clusters. These

9

Figure 4. The level of ECI (A) and the density of floating (B), labor (C), and residential (D)
population in Seoul. The high, medium, and low level of the values in a cluster are depicted in
red, gray, and blue color, respectively.

patterns are depicted in Figure 4. The results show that regions with high ECI correspond to

areas with bigger number of both floating and labor populations. However, these high ECI re-

gions do not necessarily coincide with a bigger number of residential population. This finding

supports Christaller’s theory by illustrating that central places primarily support production activ-

ities, whereas surrounding areas with lower centrality predominantly serve residential functions.

Table 2. Correlations between the various characteristics of an area and the ECI of a region. ECIc
is the economic complexity of the cluster, Diversityc is the diversity of small business shops,
S hopsc is the number of shops in the cluster, and Pricec is the average land price of the area.
Laborc, Floatc, and Resic are labor, floating, and residential population numbers, respectively.

ECIc

Diversityc

S hopsc

Laborc

Floatc

Resic

Pricec

ECIc
Diversityc
S hopsc
Laborc
Floatc
Resic
Pricec

1
0.056
0.449
0.564
0.267
−0.574
0.661

1
0.706
0.250
0.638
0.413
−0.034

1
0.320
−0.281
0.442

1
0.271
0.064

1
−0.481

1

1
0.384
0.667
0.184
0.222

10

To delve into the production side, we check the Pearson correlation coefficients between

the population type in regions and the ECI of them (Table 2), and the point-biserial correlation

between the labor share of industrial sector in a region and the ECI in the region3 (Table 3).

Table 2 shows that the high correlation between the ECI and the labor population of the area,

while negative correlation between the ECI and the residential population. Furthermore, the

place with high ECI is corresponds with relatively higher land price as well. Interestingly, the

diversity of amenity shops is not necessarily correspond with the high ECI of the area.

Table 3. Correlation coefficients between labor share of industrial sector and the ECI of a region

Industrial sector

The level of ECI in a region
Intermediate
High

Low

Financial and insurance
Professional, scientific and technical services
Information and communication
Wholesale and retail trade
Business facilities management and business support services; rental and leasing activities
Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
Accommodation and food service activities
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Public administration and defence; compulsory social security
Mining and quarrying
Transportation and storage
Construction
Real estate activities
Manufacturing
Water supply; sewage, waste management, materials recovery
Arts, sports and recreation related services
Education
Human health and social work activities
Membership organizations, repair and other personal services

0.386
0.383
0.280
0.222
0.075
0.042
0.035
0.014
-0.014
-0.028
-0.099
-0.109
-0.131
-0.162
-0.193
-0.224
-0.311
-0.378
-0.386

0.036
0.138
0.208
0.012
0.180
-0.056
-0.083
-0.024
-0.026
0.084
-0.135
0.077
-0.050
-0.060
-0.065
-0.000
-0.059
-0.193
-0.167

-0.355
-0.440
-0.415
-0.196
-0.219
0.013
0.042
0.009
0.034
-0.049
0.199
0.025
0.153
0.188
0.218
0.187
0.3152
0.483
0.468

Table 3 shows that population working in “financial and insurance sector” and “professional,

scientific and technical services” are more likely to be concentrated in high ECI regions, by

showing relatively high value of correlation 0.386 and 0.383, respectively. By contrast, labor

shares in construction, manufacturing, and sectors related with infra structure, which are a bit far

from the central role of a city, are higher in regions with relatively low ECI, with scoring negative

correlation.

According to Table 2 and 3, the high ECI regions exhibit the high ECI not only in terms of

city function as shown in Figure 3 but also in production side. Our results confirms the hypothesis

suggested by Christaller that the cenral places plays a crucial role in consumption and at the same

time, in production as well.

3The industrial sectors are classified by the Korean Standard Industrial Classification.

11

3. Discussion and Conclusion

In the preface of his doctoral thesis, Christaller stated that the purpose of Central Place

Theory (CPT) is to analyze the economic and geographical principles that determine the spa-

tial arrangement of urban functions. Rather than merely describing these arrangements, as

typified by the hexagonal configuration, he emphasized the interactions between central func-

tions—represented by sets of goods and services—and their centrality within the city. Despite

of the theoretical contribution of CPT, it has been limited to apply for the real world, since CPT

was developed with assumption the uniformly distributed consumer in a homogeneous space.

When focusing on the key principle of CPT, we could find the similarity between the concept of

economic complexity, which is already widely used thanks to its flexibility and applicability, and

suggest the two economic complexity indices, PCI and ECI, as a metric for the centrality in CPT.

We calculate the PCI of products and the ECI of places by using the geo-location data of small

businesses in Seoul and test whether these two metrics well capture the centrality of products

and places.

First, to capture the effect of PCI of a product on the market boundary of the product, we

calculate the minimum distance among markets of the product by using the shop location data,
and see the effect of the PCI on the minimum market distance. Our result show that a high PCI

product is likely to have a broader market boundary. When 1 unit of the standard deviation of

PCI increases, the minimum distance among the product’s markets increases, on average, 0.297-
0.324 km. The difference in market distance between a product with the minimum PCI and that

with the maximum PCI is 2.1-2.3 km. In addition, to capture the demand threshold of a product,

which is the minimum number of customers necessary for a central function to exist, we look
at the effect of PCI on the distance between the residential area and the shop the consumption

behavior happen by using the card transaction data. Our results show that a consumer who

purchase a high PCI product is more likely to be from further away from the shop. When the one

standard deviation of the PCI of products increases, consumers travel 1.782-1.838 km further to
purchase the product. The difference in market range between a product with the minimum PCI

and that with the maximum PCI is 8.2–9.2 km.

Second, following the logical process in the Christaller’s theory, we look at the economic

complexity of places. According to him, the centrality of location is based on the accumulated

functions provided by products and services on the place, given that there exist various products

12

in the place. We expected that the recursive structure of economic complexity index well capture

this aspect and see whether the ECI of places successfully identify the central places in terms

of city function and the production. When we visualized the ECI of places, we found that high

ECI places are the well-known for Seoul’s economically and politically central places including,

for example, the central bank of Korea, a terminal for high speed rail and express bus terminal,

financial hub, headquarters of big firm, like Samsung. When checking the production side by

looking at the population composition of a place and the industrial sector that the labor share

is working at, we find that the high ECI places play a central role for more complex economic

activities. Furthermore, the high ECI places are strongly correlated with the labor population,

especially those associated with knowledge intensive industries. Our results confirm that ECI is

well representing the level of centrality of places.

Figure 5. Robustness of economic complexity indices as a measure for the centrality using the
location data of all shops in Seoul. (A) ECI and (B) Diversity over the spatial units in Seoul.
(C) Contingency matrix between ECI rank and PCI rank and (D) between Diversity rank and
Uniqueness rank.

One might argue that an alternative metric, such as the diversity of economic activity in a

13

place, could effectively represent the centrality of a place. This notion could be supported by

Christaller’s argument that the most unique goods are produced in the most central locations,

whereas ubiquitous goods are produced universally, independent of a place’s centrality. To ex-

plore this, we examined the diversity of goods and their spatial distribution in Seoul, comparing

to these findings with the results of PCI and ECI. As illustrated in Figures 5 (A) and (B), the
regional diversity rankings in Seoul present a different picture to that depicted by the complex-

ity index, with regions of high diversity not necessarily correlating with the central functions of

Seoul.

Further analysis involved examining a contingency matrix for the diversity versus the unique-

ness of goods, as shown in Figure 5 (D), to investigate the recursive relationship between unique-

ness and diversity. The dark area on the left side of Figure 5 (D), regardless of the level of

diversity, indicates that the uniqueness of products does not correlate with diversity. A recur-

sive structure, if present, would likely show products in the upper right corner of the matrix,

indicating regions where high uniqueness products are produced alongside high diversity, as the
relationship between PCI and ECI in Figure 5 (C). For the principle of low PCI/uniqueness prod-
ucts being produced in low ECI/diversity regions to hold, the top left corner of the contingency

matrix would need to be dark. However, this is observed only in the case of the economic com-

plexity index (Figure 5 (C)), but not for diversity. These findings confirm that the economic
complexity indices, PCI and ECI, effectively embody the recursive structure of centrality defined

in CPT.

Taken together, we present a metric to measure the centrality of a product and a region with

borrowing the theoretical foundation of Christaller’s CPT. Given the core principle of CPT is the

interaction between the centrality of products and places, our metrics, stemming from the field of

economic complexity, are conceptually consistent with the centrality of products and places. Our

findings supports our arguments that PCI of products are positively correlated with the market

size of the products, and high ECI places is the place that provides the central city functions and

complex products. Considering that we use the location data of shops that are free from the data

privacy issue, our findings can contribute to the body of literature on urban economy and policy

makers by capturing the dynamic nature of urban structure more precisely and easily.

14

4. Methods

Detecting the spatial unit of analysis

By using the location data of all small business shops in Seoul, first, we calculate the effective

number of small businesses, Ai and detect the amenity dense neighborhood Hidalgo et al. (2020);

Jun et al. (2022).

Ai =

N(cid:88)

j=1

e−γdi j

(3)

where N denotes the total number of stores in the city and di j is the geodesic distance between
stores i and j. With the stand point of small business shop i, the effect of the existence of other

store is diminishing over distance. γ, decay parameter capture this diminishing influence of

distant stores. In our analysis, we set γ into 7.58.

Second, by looking the spatial distribution of the effective number of shops, we identify the

local peaks of Ai on the map. Then, as capturing the center of the cluster with the local peak, we

allocate neigh by shops to the cluster until the boundaries of the cluster are overlapped, resulting

in 523 amenity clusters, whose average radius is 241 meters. Following analysis is based on this

detected spatial unit of analysis that are depicted in Figure 3.

Data

On the detected spatial unit of analysis, we accumulated various big data. To detect the

amenity clusters and examine the composition of various amenity types they provides, we use

data on small businesses sourced from the Korean Small Enterprise and Market Service (KSEMS).

This dataset encompasses detailed information on the location and business categories of 401,071

small businesses observed to be in operation during the period from March 2019 to June 2019.
To investigate the urban structure without COVID-19 effects, we choose the data of 2019.

To examine the structure of economic activities in urban areas, we use spatial statistics

data on residential, labor, and floating populations in 2019 and credit card transactions in June

2019. First, the residential and labor population data is from Korea National Statistical

Office (KOSTAT). The residential and labor populations represent the number of people living

in households and working within a given area based on 100m × 100m cell unit, respectively.

Second, human mobility big data, a floating population, is collected from the cell phone activity

15

of personal subscribers to SK Telecom, the biggest network provider in South Korea. Here, float-

ing population refers to the daily average of people staying or moving within a given area based

on 50m × 50m cell unit.

Finally, we also use credit card data provided by BC Credit Card Corporation for the ro-

bustness check. The credit card data includes information on the total number and amount of

purchases (in KRW), number of stores, location, and industry classification provided by BC. Due

to privacy concerns, the information is provided with aggregated based on 50m × 50m cell unit.

We reconfigure location information of the residential, labor, and floating population data

and credit card data into our detected amenity clusters in Section 2. Again, there are 523 small

business clusters in our analysis.

Calculating complexity index of region and product

Motivated by the Christaller’s conceptualization of place centrality Christaller (1933), whose

bears resemblance to the principles underlying the Economic Complexity Index, we utilize eco-

nomic complexity indices as proxies for the assessing the centrality of locations and goods.

Figure 1 describe the concepts of centrality by Christaller and that of economic complexity,

showing the similarity between the two in terms of recursive structure. Hidalgo and Hausmann

(2009) introduced new metric on economic complexity, with describing that complex economies

are those involved in complex activities, while complex activities are those performed by com-

plex economies (Hidalgo, 2021). By using the method of reflection, Hidalgo and Hausmann

(2009) derived the complexity indexes that the economic complexity index (ECI: the complex-

ity of embedded production capability of a place), which is normalized average of the product

complexity, and that the product complexity index (PCI: the complexity of required production

capability for a product), which is normalized average of the economic complexity. Following

Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009), we calculate ECI of a region and PCI of a product as shown in

Equation 4 and 5.

ECIc = Kc = 1
Mc

(cid:88)

p

McpKp

(4)

16

PCIp = Kp = 1
Mp

(cid:88)

c

McpKc

(5)

where Mcp is a binary matrix consisted of 0 or 1, representing subscript c is cluster of small

businesses, while p is product. To determine an element of the matrix, we calculate Revealed
Comparative Advantage of a product p in the shops’ cluster c (RCA = shopscp/ (cid:80)
c shopscp/ (cid:80)
looking at the number of shops in a cluster, shopscp (Balassa, 1965). When Mcp equals to 1, we

p shopscp
cp shopscp

) by

(cid:80)

regard a cluster c has the comparative advantage in product p.4

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant through

the Korea Government [Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT)] under Grant NRF-2022R1A5A7033499.

We also thank the support from Inha University.

Data Availability Statement

The small business firm data is provided by Korean Small Enterprise and Market

Service (KSEMS). The labor and residential population data is provided by Korea National

Statistical Office (KOSTAT). The original small business firms and labor and residen-

tial population data can be found in the OPENapi portal: https://www.data.go.kr/ and

https://sgis.kostat.go.kr/.

4We normalize the complexity indexes, between 0 and 1 for the convenience of interpreting results: ECIc =

Kc−min(Kc)
max(Kc)

, PCIp = Kp−min(Kp)
max(Kp)

17

References

Anas, A., Arnott, R., Small, K.A., 1998. Urban spatial structure. Journal of economic literature 36, 1426–1464.

Balassa, B., 1965. Trade liberalisation and “revealed” comparative advantage. Manchester School 33, 99–123.

Boussauw, K., Van Meeteren, M., Witlox, F., 2014. Short trips and central places: The home-school distances in the

flemish primary education system (belgium). Applied Geography 53, 311–322.

Bunge, W., 1962. Theoretical geography. Lund studies in geography 1, 210p.

Christaller, W., 1933. Die zentralen orte in s¨uddeutschland (the central places in southern germany). Jena: Gustav Fischer

.

Dale, B., Sjøholt, P., 2007. The changing structure of the central place system in trøndelag, norway, over the past 40

years–viewed in the light of old and recent theories and trends. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography

89, 13–30.

Hidalgo, C.A., 2021. Economic complexity theory and applications. Nature Reviews Physics 3, 92–113.

Hidalgo, C.A., Casta˜ner, E., Sevtsuk, A., 2020. The amenity mix of urban neighborhoods. Habitat International 106,

102205.

Hidalgo, C.A., Hausmann, R., 2009. The building blocks of economic complexity. Proceedings of the national academy

of sciences 106, 10570–10575.

Jun, B., Jara-Figueroa, C., Yu, D., 2022. The economic resilience of a city: the effect of relatedness on the survival of

amenity shops during the covid-19 pandemic. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 15, 551–573.

Kii, M., Tamaki, T., Suzuki, T., Nonomura, A., 2023. Estimating urban spatial structure based on remote sensing data.

Scientific Reports 13, 8804.

Mulligan, G.F., Partridge, M.D., Carruthers, J.I., 2012. Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science. The

Annals of Regional Science 48, 405–431.

Neal, Z.P., 2011. From central places to network bases: A transition in the us urban hierarchy, 1900–2000. City &

Community 10, 49–75.

Pacione, M., 2009. Urban geography: A global perspective. Routledge.

Shearmur, R., Doloreux, D., 2015. Central places or networks? paradigms, metaphors, and spatial configurations of

innovation-related service use. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 47, 1521–1539.

Van Meeteren, M., Poorthuis, A., 2018. Christaller and “big data”: recalibrating central place theory via the geoweb.

Urban Geography 39, 122–148.

18

