4

2

0

2

c

e

D

0

2

]

E

C

.

s

c

[

1

v

1

0

8

5

1
.
2
1
4
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Graphical Abstract

Bi-directional Mapping of Morphology Metrics and 3D City Blocks for En-
hanced Characterization and Generation of Urban Form

Chenyi Cai, Biao Li, Qiyan Zhang, Xiao Wang, Filip Biljecki, Pieter Herthogs

 
 
 
 
 
 
Highlights

Bi-directional Mapping of Morphology Metrics and 3D City Blocks for En-
hanced Characterization and Generation of Urban Form

Chenyi Cai, Biao Li, Qiyan Zhang, Xiao Wang, Filip Biljecki, Pieter Herthogs

• Linking morphology metrics and urban form generation bi-directionally.

• Enhanced 3D morphology metrics to characterize 3D block-scale of complex urban

form.

• Innovative formulation and evaluation of morphology metrics by comparisons.

• Applying machine learning, data clustering and case retrieval techniques.

• Driving the coupling of urban form generation and performance optimization in

CUD.

Bi-directional Mapping of Morphology Metrics and 3D City
Blocks for Enhanced Characterization and Generation of Urban
Form

Chenyi Caia,∗, Biao Lib, Qiyan Zhangc, Xiao Wangb, Filip Biljeckid,e, Pieter Herthogsa

aSingapore-ETH Centre, Future Cities Lab Global Programme, CREATE campus, 1 Create Way,
#06-01 CREATE Tower, 138602, Singapore
bSchool of Architecture, Southeast University, 2 Sipailou, Nanjing, 210096, China
cDepartment of Architecture, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, Stefano-Franscini-Platz
1, Z¨urich, 8093, Switzerland
dDepartment of Architecture, National University of Singapore, 4 Architecture
Drive, Singapore, 117566, Singapore
eDepartment of Real Estate, National University of Singapore, 15 Kent Ridge
Drive, Singapore, 119245, Singapore

Abstract

Urban morphology, examining city spatial configurations, links urban design to sustain-
ability. Morphology metrics play a fundamental role in performance-driven computational
urban design (CUD) which integrates urban form generation, performance evaluation and
optimization. However, a critical gap remains between performance evaluation and com-
plex urban form generation, caused by the disconnection between morphology metrics
and urban form, particularly in metric-to-form workflows. It prevents the application of
optimized metrics to generate improved urban form with enhanced urban performance.
Formulating morphology metrics that not only effectively characterize complex urban
forms but also enable the reconstruction of diverse forms is of significant importance.
This paper highlights the importance of establishing a bi-directional mapping between
morphology metrics and complex urban form to enable the integration of urban form
generation with performance evaluation. We present an approach that can 1) formulate
morphology metrics to both characterize urban forms and in reverse, retrieve diverse
similar 3D urban forms, and 2) evaluate the effectiveness of morphology metrics in rep-
resenting 3D urban form characteristics of blocks by comparison. We demonstrate the
methodology with 3D urban models of New York City, covering 14,248 blocks. We use
neural networks and information retrieval for morphology metric encoding, urban form
clustering and morphology metric evaluation. We identified an effective set of morphol-
ogy metrics for characterizing block-scale urban forms through comparison. The pro-
posed methodology tightly couples complex urban forms with morphology metrics, hence
it can enable a seamless and bidirectional relationship between urban form generation
and optimization in performance-driven urban design towards sustainable urban design
and planning.

Keywords: 3D urban morphology, digital urban design, urban form representation, 3D
model clustering, self-organizing map

∗Corresponding author: Chenyi Cai. Email: chenyi.cai@sec.ethz.ch

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

December 23, 2024

1. Introduction

Urban form, or the spatial structure of cities, is typically examined as the physi-
cal spatial configuration within urban spaces (Lynch and Rodwin, 1958; Kropf, 2009;
Chiaradia, 2019). Urban morphology — the study of urban form — focuses on how the
physical form and structure of cities are shaped and organized. It examines the patterns
and layouts of buildings, open spaces, streets and other elements that make up the built
environment (Moudon, 1997; Scheer, 2016; Kropf, 2018). The morphological approach
seeks to understand the relationship between physical urban form patterns and a range
of issues regarding urban social, economic, and environmental sustainability (Jabareen,
2006; Ratti et al., 2003). Urban morphology exhibits strong relationships with urban
performance evaluations such as micro-climate, heat and energy, mobility resilience, and
the entire social-economic-technological fabric of urban systems (Zhou et al., 2022; Mash-
hoodi and Unceta, 2024; Rode et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2016; Bramley and Power, 2009).
Therefore, effectively representing the characteristics of urban form is crucial for linking
urban design with performance evaluations.

Morphology metrics, the representations of urban form characteristics, are fundamen-
tal to understanding the urban morphology of the built environment and to generating
urban forms for sustainable development (Dibble et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2023). Effec-
tive morphology metrics facilitate both the analysis of existing forms and the generation of
future designs, enabling a holistic approach to urban planning and design. They provide
quantifiable measures of urban form that can be linked to various urban performance
evaluations. For instance, solar and energy efficiency can be assessed by morphology
metrics such as surface-to-volume ratio, sky view factor and others (Chatzipoulka et al.,
2018). Researchers use different sets of morphology metrics to investigate the relationship
between urban form and sustainability outcomes, such as urban ventilation, air pollution,
urban heat island (UHI), transportation mode and more (Galster et al., 2001; Li et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2018; Rybarczyk and Wu, 2014; Zhang et al., 2023). Mor-
phology metrics measure urban form and support the interpretation of shape complexity
with characterizations such as footprints, orientations and surface ratios (Basaraner and
Cetinkaya, 2017). Consequently, performance-driven urban form generation has garnered
significant attention and investigations to support computational urban design (CUD)
and optimization, pursuing more comfortable indoor and outdoor environments. The
workflow consists of three steps - urban form generation, performance evaluation, and
performance-driven optimization (Shi et al., 2017; Koenig et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2024).
However, performance-driven CUD is hindered by disconnected workflows, particularly
the gap between urban form generation and performance evaluation.

The fundamental cause of the gap mentioned above is the disruption in the link-
ages between morphology metrics and urban form, which are mostly one-directional from
form to metric. The absence of operations in the metric-to-form direction hinders the
generation of the improved urban form based on the morphology metrics within the op-
timized solution space of the performance evaluation(Figure 1). The performance-driven
CUD process should ideally operate as multiple iterations of complete loops. One it-
eration of the loop begins with the generation of the initial urban form, followed by
performance evaluation based on its morphology metrics. Optimization engines are then
employed to enhance performance, identifying optimized values of morphology metrics.
These optimized metrics are subsequently used to generate improved urban forms, en-
abling iterative refinement and continuous integration between performance evaluation,
optimization, and form generation. However, when the metric-to-form workflow is dis-

2

rupted, optimized morphology metrics cannot be applied to generate corresponding 3D
urban form models, leading to the inability to produce urban form models from these
optimized metrics.

Figure 1: The general workflow of performance-driven computational urban design includes urban form
generation, performance evaluation and optimization. It shows the location of the disconnection between
morphology metrics and urban form generation.

The gap is generally approached in two main ways. Firstly, design variables of para-
metric design act as alternative representations of urban form, facilitating urban form
generation. Extensive works involve manipulating urban forms through the use of design
variables of simplified geometries or predefined prototypes to generate synthetic urban
forms (Pan˜ao et al., 2008; Vermeulen et al., 2013; K¨ampf and Robinson, 2010; Gagne and
Andersen, 2012; Yi and Kim, 2015; Zhang et al., 2019). The corresponding morphology
metrics are subsequently calculated from these generated forms and used for performance
evaluation. Through iterative adjustments of design variables and the repeated execution
of this process, optimized urban forms are identified (Pan˜ao et al., 2008; Vermeulen et al.,
2013; Gagne and Andersen, 2012; Yi and Kim, 2015; Choi et al., 2021). However, while
this method produces performance-driven optimized urban forms, these forms are lim-
ited to simplified prototypes, insufficient to capture the complexity of real-world urban
environments. Secondly, the other approach addresses the complexity of urban forms by
utilizing cases from the built environment or urban design proposals. In this method,
morphology metrics related to urban performance are calculated from the provided mod-
els, thereby enabling performance evaluation of the studied urban form (Yu et al., 2015;
K¨ampf and Robinson, 2009; Rode et al., 2014). However, while this approach can de-
liver optimized metrics with better urban performance, it fails to generate optimized

3

urban forms based on these metrics, thereby hindering the automation of the urban form
optimization process.

The significant gap hinders performance-driven urban form generation: it can achieve
either automated optimization or complexity in urban forms, but not both simultaneously.
We argue that this gap fundamentally stems from the absence of a bi-directional mapping
between morphology metrics and urban forms that seamlessly integrates form-to-metric
and metric-to-form processes. The issue arises from the fact that, in performance-driven
CUD, while morphology metrics are used for performance evaluation and optimization,
the optimized metrics cannot be effectively applied to generate corresponding optimized
urban form models.

It is essential to formulate morphology metrics that not only effectively characterize
complex urban forms but also enable the reconstruction of diverse forms. Approaches
are needed to formulate these metrics and evaluate their effectiveness in representing
block-scale urban morphology, particularly for 3D urban models. Most importantly, the
approaches should enable urban form generation aligned with the desired urban form
types based on input morphology metrics. They should also address the complexity of
urban form by generating 3D models that are consistent with the intended types and
exhibit sufficient richness. Calculating morphology metrics from 3D models is applicable,
hence by establishing a robust metric-to-form connection, it becomes feasible to enable a
true bidirectional mapping between morphology metrics and the generation of complex
urban forms. This integration ultimately bridges the gap between performance evaluation
and urban form generation, advancing computational urban design.

The complexity of urban form characteristics cannot be encapsulated in a single in-
dicator, nor in the sheer number and diversity of indicators. Hence, urban morphology
metrics, which is a combination of multiple urban morphology indicators (UMI), should
be a meaningful measurement for urban form elements, depicting shape complexity, mea-
suring relative richness and diversity, and quantifying aggregation and contagion (Dibble
et al., 2019; O’Neill et al., 1988). There are urban morphology-related indicators describ-
ing various urban units including streets, plots, buildings and open spaces (Elzeni et al.,
2022). They vary in scales including landscape, surface, urban canopy, and buildings (Li
and Zeng, 2024; Biljecki and Chow, 2022).

Block is an important unit in understanding and interpreting urban design. City
blocks are the space for buildings within the street pattern of a city, and form the basic
unit of a city’s urban fabric. Block-scale urban morphology contains a group of buildings
rather than a single architectural element (Berghauser Pont and Haupt, 2021) and block
environment characteristics have significant effects on energy efficiency (Wan et al., 2024).
However, the evaluation methods of morphology metrics in representing such block-scale
building combinations have not been fully discovered. The characterization of 2D urban
morphology has been extensively investigated (Labetski et al., 2023; Biljecki and Chow,
2022), and applied in topics such as urban pattern changes (Herold et al., 2002) and
regionalization (Yang et al., 2022), morphological feature extraction (Cai et al., 2021), and
urban form-energy relations (Mashhoodi and Unceta, 2024). However, the consistency
of representing urban morphology is significantly influenced by the vertical dimensions
and characteristics (Yang et al., 2022). In addition, we need approaches to evaluate the
effectiveness of morphology metrics in representing block-scale building patterns. These
approaches need to be flexible and adaptive to minor changes in UMIs when it applied
to urban blocks from different regions.

We propose approaches that tackle the challenging task of generating diverse yet

4

analogous 3D urban form based on morphology metrics derived from specific urban form
models, establishing a bidirectional connection between morphology metrics and the cor-
responding urban form. Meanwhile, our approaches can evaluate the effectiveness of mor-
phology metrics in representing urban form characteristics through comparisons. As a
result, the morphology metrics not only effectively represent the complexity of block-scale
3D urban forms, but also support the generation of 3D models that align with intended
urban form types while addressing urban form diversity. Additionally, the methodology is
adaptable to urban blocks from other regions, allowing the identification of suitable mor-
phology metrics across varied contexts. The establishment of the metric-to-form link is
critical for advancing the automation of performance-driven computational urban design
workflows. The approaches can further enable the generation of improved urban form
models through optimized morphology metrics linked to enhanced performance evalua-
tion.

Using machine learning and information retrieval techniques, we establish a systematic
workflow that can derive city block morphology metrics from 3D models to simultaneously
improve the characterisation, generation, and performance evaluation of urban form. We
demonstrate it with 3D urban data of New York City, including 14 248 blocks. The
Self-organizing map (SOM) is used to cluster and encode the block-scale 3D models.
Associating morphology metrics and 3D urban form models allows the flexible retrieval
of diverse 3D models according to the input morphology metrics of the target urban
form. Additionally, we identified effective morphology metrics for characterising block-
scale 3D urban forms for our dataset by comparing multiple sets. The methodology and
outcomes can be applied to further support timely adjustments and reflections between
urban design outcomes and performance evaluation in computational models. Using the
approach, the built urban form, designer-readable 3D models and computable metrics
can be tightly associated and interlinked.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a litera-
ture overview of existing urban morphology metrics, their applications in urban form
generation and design impact analysis, and inherent challenges. Section 3 presents our
methodology for constructing morphology metrics of 3D block-scale urban forms and clus-
tering based on the morphology metrics. Section 4 demonstrates how our methodology
can be applied for digitally bridging morphology metrics and 3D urban forms, as well as
evaluating the capacity of morphology metrics in representing 3D urban forms. Finally,
in section 5 and 6, we summarize key contributions, acknowledge remaining limitations
and outline directions for future work.

2. Background

2.1. Performance-driven urban form generation

Urban form, or the spatial structure of cities, is typically examined as the physical
configuration of various elements within urban spaces (Batty, 1976; Kropf, 2018; Lynch
and Rodwin, 1958). Urban form demonstrates significant correlations with urban perfor-
mance, for instance, it impacts micro-climates, thermal and energy dynamics, mobility
resilience, and the broader socio-economic-technological structure of urban systems (An-
derson et al., 1996; Chiaradia, 2019; Zhou et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2016; Bramley and
Power, 2009). Urban form generation, one of the main topics in computational urban
design, provides systematic approaches to produce design solutions and accelerate urban
design decisions and processes by using computational tools (Batty, 1991; Jiang et al.,

5

2024; Wilson et al., 2019). The urban form generation process involves modelling methods
of representing and quantifying urban forms to be machine-readable and computable, and
optimization methods to evolve the urban forms to meet pre-defined goals (Miao et al.,
2018; Jiang et al., 2024).

Quantified measurements of urban forms, which are associated with urban form char-
acteristics, are essential for performance-driven urban form generation, especially for
urban environmental performance evaluation and optimization. One of the advantages of
performance-driven computational urban design workflow is to enable the automatic gen-
eration of sustainable urban spatial configurations by optimizing design solutions based
on environmental metrics (Koenig et al., 2020; Canuto et al., 2024). Researchers have
developed various computational and parametric computer-aided design tools for ur-
ban form generation, performance evaluation, and performance-driven optimization (Shi
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2024). During the process, researchers use a variety of urban
morphology metrics to measure the characteristics of urban form in different aspects and
contexts (Zhang et al., 2023). The relationships between urban form and environmental
performance have been investigated from various perspectives. Morphological metrics
have proven effective in analyzing sustainable outcomes. A broad spectrum of research
has leveraged urban morphology metrics, such as site coverage (Li et al., 2024), sky view
factor (Ratti et al., 2003; Li et al., 2022), built volume (Rode et al., 2014), building height
(Yi and Kim, 2015; Li et al., 2024), height-to-width ratio (Elzeni et al., 2022), and others
to analyze, predict, and optimize environmental performance metrics such as walkability
(Rakha and Reinhart, 2012), thermal comfort (Yu et al., 2015), solar efficiency (Rode
et al., 2014; Li et al., 2024), urban ventilation (Li et al., 2022) and so on. Urban mor-
phology metrics are central to performance-driven urban design as they serve as a crucial
link between urban forms and performance evaluation and optimization.

In performance-driven computational urban design, the connections between urban
form to urban morphology metrics are mostly form-to-metric one-way links, hindering
the fully automated process of performance-driven urban form generation, as illustrated
in Figure 1. The gap is typically addressed through two main approaches. Firstly, re-
searchers incorporate parametric approaches for manipulating urban forms. Design vari-
ables are identified according to predefined prototypes which are simplified geometries to
generate synthetic urban forms. An example of replicating a specific urban form is to
simulate morphology, and building structure form using shape grammar, translating the
properties and their interrelationships to geometric rules (Wang et al., 2020; Mandi´c and
Tepavˇcevi´c, 2015). Li et al. (2024) generated simplified block-scale urban forms based
on grids and linked solar performance with urban form metrics such as floor area ratio
(FAR) and site coverage (SC). It enables the integration of form generation, solar simula-
tion, and optimization for multi-objective solar performance. Shen and Ye (2024) utilized
cellular automata for synthesizing simplified layouts that compiled 3D grids, enabling a
form generation process that can be integrated with daylight performance simulation and
generic optimization to produce optimized housing layouts. Zhang et al. (2019) focused
on generating blocks based on six typology categories (e.g. blocks with towers, court-
yards), and then morphological metrics (e.g. Open Space Ratio (OSR), Roof-to-envelope
area ratio) derived from these synthesized blocks are used to identify the impacts of de-
sign factors on solar potential and energy performance (Zhang et al., 2019). The process
incorporates optimization methods whereby iterative adjustments of design variables and
repeated execution yield a solution space that aligns with predefined performance objec-
tives, thereby contributing to the generation of optimized urban forms (Koenig et al.,

6

2020; Stouffs and Rafiq, 2015). However, while this method produces performance-driven
optimized urban forms, these forms are limited to simplified prototypes, insufficient to
capture the complexity of real-world urban environments.

Secondly, the other approach addresses the complexity of urban forms by utilizing
cases from the built environment, where urban forms are more realistic and complex with
diverse variants in morphology. Zhou et al. (2022) extracted morphological metrics such
as sky view factor (SVF) and building surface fraction (BSF), from the built environment.
Research shows that morphological metrics significantly affect land surface temperature
(LST) at the local scale. Li et al. (2022) assessed the outdoor ventilation conditions that
can be tightly correlated with the sky view factor (SVF). Utilizing morphology parame-
ters derived from building layouts, Yu et al. (2015) applied a multi-objective optimization
model in green building design. They identified optimal variables of a building design (e.g.
floor area, window–wall ratio), predicted improved energy consumption and indoor ther-
mal comfort. Using the 3D model of the city of Adelaide, Zhao and Gou (2023) extracted
morphological parameters from existing 3D city models, including building density, plot
ratio, variation of building height, wall-to-roof ratio, and so on. They performed solar
radiation simulations for selected urban blocks from varied clusters, offering an essential
benchmark for optimizing solar deployment in mixed-use urban neighbourhoods. The au-
thors aimed to offer valuable references for early-stage design decisions; however, despite
conducting comprehensive clustering of all the 3D models, they had to reduce diverse ur-
ban forms to five prototypes. Similar challenges have been encountered in other studies
attempting to link morphological parameters to the studied 3D urban forms, despite the
availability of various optimization methods (e.g. Rode et al. (2014); K¨ampf and Robin-
son (2009); Zhang et al. (2024)). Consequently, investigations using complex real-world
urban forms can yield insights into optimized morphological parameters with enhanced
performance outcomes, but lack providing improved urban forms that can directly in-
form design decisions. Therefore, to support the automated performance-driven urban
form generation, it is essential to formulate morphology metrics that can both effectively
characterize urban forms and enable the metrics-to-form generations.

2.2. Urban morphology metrics

·
Urban morphology is the multidisciplinary and multi-scale method of investigating
the physical form of settlements, which is an important task in multiple domains such as
urban planning, landscape and geography (Kropf, 2009; Moudon, 1997). In digital urban
planning and design, multiple representations, quantifications and parameters are utilized
towards computational design for modelling and simulating (Batty, 1976; Jiang et al.,
2024). As the main components of the 3D urban morphology, buildings are arranged in
various configurations throughout cities, creating diverse morphologies (Liu et al., 2014,
2020). Each building possesses distinct physical attributes, such as height, area, volume,
and outline. These unique characteristics collectively influence the overall 3D urban
morphology of a region. Hence many efforts have been made to develop morphology
metrics for characterizing, analyzing and understanding spatiotemporal patterns of the
built environments.

Urban forms can be quantified and represented by urban morphology metrics using
measurements from various aspects (e.g. density, shape), and distribution of buildings,
streets, and open spaces. Multi-disciplinary investigations for quantitatively analysing
and representing urban form characteristics vary in methods and scales (Li and Zeng,

7

2024; Zhang et al., 2023). With the explosive growth of information technology and
available multi-source data, researchers from multiple disciplines have developed various
approaches for quantifying morphology, including shape grammar approaches, spatial
analytical approaches, ML-based approaches and urban morphological metrics (Kropf,
2018; Biljecki and Chow, 2022; Li and Zeng, 2024). Researchers have investigated com-
prehensive lists of UMIs with multi-scale measures through systematic literature reviews
(Biljecki and Chow, 2022; Li and Zeng, 2024). Morphology metrics can represent the
complexity, relative richness and diversity of urban forms. By employing a variety of
spatial metrics, researchers can assess the compactness, connectivity, and complexity of
urban environments, which in turn inform planning and policy decisions (Lowry and
Lowry, 2014).

Traditional urban morphology metrics were widely used to quantify two-dimensional
spatiotemporal patterns based on land use/cover data and are extensively applied to
optimize land use, improve and guide urban developments (Jabareen, 2006; Yu et al.,
2020). For example, indicators like floor area ratio (FAR), building density (BD), and
street network density provide insights into land use efficiency and urban sprawl (Tsai,
2005). Berghauser Pont and Haupt (2021) developed Spacemate with a focus on vari-
ous types of density on the urban block such as compactness (FAR), the coverage (BD),
spaciousness: open space ratio (OSR), network density and the average number of stores
(Berghauser Pont and Haupt, 2005). Shape indicators can be used to identify block
footprint characteristics, then developing case-based methods for urban design genera-
tion (Xu and Li, 2019). Additionally, advanced metrics derived from spatial analysis
techniques, such as fractal factors and space syntax, allow for a deeper examination of
the spatial organization and accessibility of urban areas (Hillier et al., 1976; Batty and
Longley, 1994).

Vertical information in urban morphology has been underscored to advance three-
dimensional spatial pattern analysis based on new data sources and techniques (Liu et al.,
2020). For instance, OpenStreetMap (OSM) is an open digital mapping database cre-
ated through crowdsourced and volunteer-contributed geographic information, including
buildings and infrastructure worldwide (Herfort et al., 2023; Biljecki et al., 2023). Anyone
can edit all features of buildings and infrastructure. Researchers have advanced numer-
ous 3D indicator systems based on established theories and practices (Li and Zeng, 2024;
Labetski et al., 2023). Volumetric approaches have been used as a means of better cap-
turing the 3D morphological characteristics of cities (Bruyns et al., 2021). Morphology
metrics used are also defined and delineated in city planning regulations, and it has been
demonstrated that one can generate 3D urban form from regulations (Chadzynski et al.,
2022; Grisiute et al., 2023). Studies have extended three-dimensional landscape metrics
derived from 2D metrics using various statistical methods in the scope of the patch-mosaic
model (PMM) (Wu et al., 2017). Other scholars have developed 3D spatial metrics based
on gradient surface models, focusing on metric development on buildings to quantify ur-
ban morphology (Kedron et al., 2019). At the local scale, researchers have examined 3D
building metrics to represent the distinct characteristics of complex 3D building shapes
(Labetski et al., 2023). Indicator sets are valuable for better understanding urban forms
and for spatial analysis. However, the indicator sets remain empirical in their ability to
describe complex urban forms, and it has yet to be validated whether they are sufficient
for computers to effectively represent urban form characteristics.

Based on the existing literature, we first observe a disconnection in the fully auto-
mated process of performance-driven urban form generation and optimization, caused by

8

the lack of bi-directional mapping between morphology metrics and urban form, particu-
larly in the metric-to-form direction. However, there is a lack of approaches that couple
metrics and form. The disconnection is the key issue in generating improved 3D urban
models based on optimized morphology metrics with optimized performance. Secondly,
the complexity of urban form characteristics cannot be adequately represented by a single
indicator or soley by quantity and variety of indicators. Consequently, identifying the
urban morphology metrics that can capture aspects such as shape complexity, relative
richness and diversity, for 3D urban models is important. It requires approaches that
can evaluate the effectiveness of morphology metrics in representing block-scale urban
morphology. The following sections propose several contributions to achieve the goal
of bridging morphology metrics and complex urban forms bi-directionally to enhance
performance-driven CUD.

3. Methodology

This section introduces our methodology for improving urban form generation based
on morphology metrics derived from targeted 3D block-scale models, bridging morphology
It is a systematic pipeline that includes
metrics and 3D urban form bi-directionally.
data collection and pre-processing, morphology metrics formulation, clustering, encoding
and case retrieval techniques. For urban forms, we first calculated their morphology
metrics and used them to train self-organizing maps (SOM) for clustering the urban forms.
Then a context-based encoding method based on the trained SOMs was developed for
more effective representations for urban forms: SOMEncoding vectors. Using the trained
SOMs and SOMEncoding vectors, we can retrieve more 3D models from the dataset.
Consequently, we can retrieve 3D urban form models on the corresponding morphology
metrics. Diverse urban forms can be associated with the target urban form types and the
deriving morphology metrics, hence it can bridge morphology metrics and urban form in
digital models.

We set out the implementations based on the following scopes and aims:

• In preference of open-source geoinformation, 3D urban form data were collected
from readily accessible platforms. We used data from OpenStreetMap. Although
plots are often representative study units in urban design, we take blocks as our
study units because we can only slice blocks based on the used dataset.
In our
work, the effectiveness of morphology metrics is evaluated solely with block-scale
urban form characteristics from New York City, as it is our chosen study area.

• To develop effective morphology metrics, the selected UMIs are unambiguous, can
be universally present in all cities and have geometric significance in representing
block-scale 3D urban form characteristics of shape complexity. The morphology
metric sets we selected for comparison are primarily drawn from existing litera-
ture, so they are not exhaustive. However, they cover the four main urban form
characteristic types: height, surface, content, and shape.

• The effectiveness of morphology metrics is assessed through observational analysis
and comparative evaluation. In the experiments comparing different sets of mor-
phology metrics, a guiding principle is that the morphology metrics can represent
the constituent elements of urban form such that their homologous characteristics
can be rigorously defined and measured (Dibble et al., 2019). In our study, urban

9

forms retrieved based on similarity in morphology metrics are expected to display
analogous morphological characteristics while maintaining diverse form variations.

• The approaches for formulating morphology metrics and establishing the bi-directional
mapping between these metrics and 3D urban forms are designed to be generalizable
to other cities with varying organizational structures and urban forms. We provide
a flexible and context-based methodology that can be adaptively applied to other
datasets which can be plot-wise or from other regions, rather than attempting to
create a universal set of morphology metrics for all regions. When our proposed ap-
proaches are applied to other urban form datasets, additional specific UMIs can be
incorporated and further examined according to the characteristics of those urban
forms.

3.1. Data collection and pre-processing

An area of New York City was downloaded from OpenStreetMap, including building
footprints and road networks classified as Primary, Secondary, and Residential(Figure 2).
In the figure, buildings are coloured based on their height information. Roads categorized
as Residential primarily define block-scale units; therefore, the urban blocks used for
further studies were delineated based on the boundaries set by these three road types.

Figure 2: Our studied area and collected data include building footprints (left) and road networks (right).
(c) OpenStreetMap contributors.

When building footprints in the dataset did not have corresponding height information
(e.g. building footprints marked red in Figure 3a ), we assigned the average height of the
surrounding buildings. While this average value likely does not correspond to the actual
height, we argue this fuzzy estimation is sufficiently accurate to demonstrate our general
methodology. This resulted in a dataset of 14,248 3D city blocks. Figure 3b shows that
the height information is completed as no building or block is coloured red. Some of the
selected 3D city blocks can be visualized in Figure 3c.

3.2. Urban morphology indicator selection

For the selection of morphological indicators, we identified 15 morphological indica-
tors that are globally used for urban planning practice and urban performance research.
They represent 4 types of block characteristics: height, surface ratio, block content and

10

Figure 3: The visualisation for a) original blocks, b) after pre-processing including adding height value
and filtering out the blocks still missing height information and c) samples for block-scale 3D models.
The buildings that missing height information are coloured in red.

block 2D shape. Table 1 provides definitions for each indicator, detailing their relevance
in representing the urban form characteristics of a block. The building coverage ratio
(BCR), also referred to as site coverage and the ground space index (GSI), and the
floor area ratio (FAR), also known as the floor space index (FSI), is among the most
widely recognized metrics. Along with maximum height (MaxH), these metrics are ex-
tensively utilized by urban planners and researchers to assess and manage urban density
and sprawl (Berghauser Pont and Haupt, 2005; Pan et al., 2008; Soliman et al., 2018).
Various height-related metrics are considered, including minimum height (MinH), aver-
age height (AveH), standard deviation of height (SDH), and weighted average height
(WAH), to comprehensively capture the vertical characteristics of a group of buildings.
To represent 2D block shape features, indicators such as Block shape factor (BSF) and
block shape squareness (BSS) are utilized. Additionally, average stories (AS) and open
space ratio (OSR) were introduced by (Berghauser Pont and Haupt, 2005). Additionally,
we incorporate morphological indicators used in urban mesoscale meteorological models
and diffusion models (Burian et al., 2002), such as complete aspect ratio (CAR) and
global height-width ratio (GHWR). For idealized building arrangements, GHWR can be
approximated by dividing the average building height by the average distance between
buildings. CAR and GHWR are selected for their geometric significance in capturing
building distributions within blocks and in representing the degree of aggregation or
dispersion of building volumes.

11

Table 1: Overview of our selected urban morphological indicators,
including their definitions and the urban form characteristic types
they describe. The table shows an example of a 3D model and its
indicator values.

Characteristic
type

UMI

Definition

Example

50.4

18.1

23

9.18

26.15

7.88

0.41

2.67

Height

Height

Height

Height

MaxHeight
(MaxH) /m

MinHeight
(MinH) /m

AverageHeight
(AveH) /m

Standard-
DeviationHeight
(SDH)

Height

Weighted-
AverageHeight
(WAH) /m

Maximum building height within
a block.

Minimum building height within
a block.

Average building height within a
block.

(cid:115)

The standard deviation of build-
ing heights within a block.

(cid:80)N

i=1 (hi − ¯h)2
sdh =
N − 1
¯h is the average height of build-
ings within the block. hi is the
height of building i.

Building height is weighted by
the building footprint area.
i=1 Aihi
(cid:80)N
i=1 Ai
hi is the height of building i.

wah =

(cid:80)N

Height

AverageStoreys (AS)

Average buildings stories within
a block.

SurfaceRatio

Building-
CoverageRatio (BCR)

The ratio of the total building
footprint area to the gross block
area.

bcr =

(cid:80)N

i=1 Ai
Ab

Ai is footprint area of building i.
Ab is gross block area. N is num-
ber of buildings in the block.

SurfaceRatio

FloorAreaRatio (FAR) The ratio of a building’s total
floor area to the gross area of its
block.

f ar =

(cid:80)N

(cid:80)S

i=1

j=1 Aij

Ab

Aij is the area of floor j of build-
ing i. S is the number of stories
of building i.

12

Characteristic
type

UMI

SurfaceRatio

CompleteAspectRatio
(CAR)

SurfaceRatio

OpenSpaceRatio
(OSR)

BlockContent GlobalHeight-

WidthRatio (GHWR)

Definition

Example

Quantifies building envelope ex-
posure per block using the for-
mula
car =

AW + AR + AG
Ab

AW is the total area of build-
ing vertical surfaces. AR is the
rooftop area. AG represents ex-
posed ground area within the
block.

Measures the proportion of a
block’s area open to the sky, cal-
culated as

osr =

Ab − (cid:80)N
(cid:80)N

i=1 Ai

,

i=1 AiLi

where Ab is the block footprint
area. Ai is the ground floor area
of building i. Li is the number of
storeys.

¯h
¯W

Ld
N − 1

Estimates the building height-to-
width ratio within a block, calcu-
lated as
ghwr ∼=
¯W =
¯W is the average distance be-
tween buildings according to De-
launay algrithm. Ld is the total
length of the Delaunay network.
N is the number of buildings in
the block.

3.68

0.22

0.68

16

15,718

0.47

0.89

BlockContent

NumberOfBuildings
(NOB)

Total number of buildings within
a block.

Block2DShape BlockArea (BA) /m2

Gross area of a block footprint.

Block2DShape BlockShapeFactor

(BSF)

Block2DShape BlockSquareness

(BSS)

Gross area of block footprint
divided by the corresponding
bounding box aligned with the
coordinate axes.

Gross area of block footprint di-
vided by the corresponding min-
imum bounding box.

Using the selected 15 UMIs, we identified six distinct morphology metric sets, each
comprising a unique combination of indicators that represent various urban form char-
acteristic types. The morphology metrics compositions are shown in Table 2. The first
basic set, BFH, is composed of three basic indicators: BCR, FAR and MaxH, and it is the
most commonly used by architects and urban planners. The indicators describe building
height and surface ratios. The basic set is commonly used for trained urban design exper-
tise but it lacks comprehensiveness for computational models. Therefore, we identified
ExtendedBFH, developing based on BFH by adding UMIs that describe the other two
characteristic types: block content and block shape. The Spacemate (Berghauser Pont

13

and Haupt, 2005) and Blockshape (Xu and Li, 2019) sets are referred from the literature.
We observe that the UMIs in Spacemate primarily represent surface ratio characteristics,
while those in Blockshape mainly describe 2D block shape features. Therefore, we believe
that they are good comparisons. The last two sets, BriefBlockMetric and HybridBlock-
Metric, are the most comprehensive, with UMIs spanning all characteristic types. The
difference is that BriefBlockMetric includes only one UMI to describe surface ratio char-
acteristics, and it omits two UMI describing height information. We will compare these
morphology metric sets in their ability to represent 3D urban forms.

Table 2: Overview of the identified urban morphology metric sets
and their UMI compositions. The table shows that different mor-
phology metric sets include indicators spanning various character-
istic types.

Morphology metric
sets

Height

SurfaceRatio BlockContent Block2DShape Resource

BFH

MaxH

ExtendedBFH

MaxH

Spacemate

AveS

BlockShape

BriefBlockMetric

AveH;
SDH;
WAH

HybridBlockMetric MaxH;
MinH;
AveH;
SDH;
WAH

BCR;
FAR

BCR;
FAR

BCR;
FAR;
OSR

FAR

CAR

BCR;
FAR;
CAR

NOB

BA

BA;
BSF;
BSS

BA

BA

GHWR;
NOB

GHWR;
NOB

Berghauser Pont
and
(2021)

Haupt

and Li

Xu
(2019)

3.3. Urban form clustering based on morphology metrics

We deployed clustering techniques using self-organizing maps (SOMs), to evaluate
the effectiveness of morphology metrics in representing urban form characteristics. By
comparing the clustering results based on different morphology metric sets, we can val-
idate their performance. We used six self-organizing maps (SOMs) for clusterings. The
samples’ morphology metrics values after normalization are used as urban form feature
vectors for the input to SOMs. Hence six SOMs were trained based on the six sets of
morphology metrics respectively. After training, the 3D urban form models were clus-
tered and indexed according to the clusters they fall within. SOM is a general-purpose
nonlinear data transformation method that offers solutions for data clustering and 2D vi-
sualization by creating continuous visual patterns on top of high-dimensional data. The
node weight value is a high-dimensional vector with the same dimension as the input
feature vectors and is updated by reducing the distance between the node and the input
data. To calculate the distance between the node and the sample, we used Euclidean

14

distance, which is the most commonly used metric for this purpose. After several iter-
ations, each node becomes associated with a set of input objects that are closer to this
node than to the other nodes.

Two simultaneous processes explain the SOM algorithm (formula 1, 2). The training
data set can be considered as X = x1, ..., xN , as a set of N points in an n-dimensional
space. A SOM can be considered as a grid with K nodes, with a set of indices yj, each
attached with a high-dimensional weight vector, wj . During the training process, an
index yj can be assigned for each data xi. The index is also called the best-matching unit
(BMU). s(wj, x) is a similarity function which is calculated by the inverse of the distance
between the input sample feature vectors x and the weight vectors of the SOM node j,
wj.

BM U (x) = max xj (f (yj|x))

f (yj|x) =

exp s (wj, x)
(cid:82) k
j=1 exp s (wj, x)

(1)

(2)

Figure 4: The clustering results for ExtendedBFH set (left) and a SOM trained by HybridBlockMetrics
(right) using self-organizing maps. The SOM trained by HybridBlockMetrics shows 3D models with
higher diversity.

In our experiments, the six SOMs all had a 10 × 10 grid. The node weights of
SOMs were updated in the same dimensions as the number of UMIs included in the
training morphology metric sets. After the SOM training, each sample is indexed with
the best-matching unit (BMU) based on the Euclidean distance between the sample and
the node weight (Cai et al., 2022). A common way of visualizing the final output of a

15

SOM is to visualize one of the input data that is associated with the nodes since a set
of input data is assigned to each node. Figure 4 is the visualization of two SOMs that
are trained with the ExtendedBFH set and HybridBlockMetrics set, respectively. From
these two SOMs, we can observe the gradient of 3D urban models. For instance, in the
HybridBlockMetrics SOM map, moving from top to bottom, we see a transition from
blocks with single buildings to those enclosed with multiple buildings. From the top left
to the bottom right, we observe a shift from low-density blocks with dispersed buildings
to higher-density blocks where buildings are more compact. When observing the general
clustering results, HybridBlockMetrics showed more potential in representing urban form
characteristics, because its SOM displays a greater variety of urban forms compared
to ExtendedBFH SOM, where urban forms showed on the map have lower diversity.
More detailed comparisons and similarity analysis based on the clustering results will be
introduced in the later sections.

Figure 5: The HybridBlockMetric SOM is sliced to observe the relevance between UMIs and their impacts
on clustering. The similarity of the indicator’s heat map indicates their similarity in representing urban
forms characteristics.

In order to have a closer look at the relevance of each UMI’s impact on clustering
urban forms, we take slices of each dimension of the SOM trained by the HybridBlock-
Metric set (Figure 5). As shown in the figure, BCR and FAR exhibit very similar heat
maps, indicating that they have comparable influence in representing the dataset of ur-
ban forms. Similarly, AveH and WAH also show a high degree of relevance to each
other. It is noteworthy that height-related Urban Morphology Indicators (UMIs), such

16

as MaxHeight, MinHeight, AverageHeight, WeightedAverageHeight, and StandardDevi-
ationHeight, generate distinct heat map patterns. This observation underscores that var-
ious height-related metrics capture different aspects of urban morphology. Consequently,
incorporating diverse height characteristics is essential for a comprehensive representation
of the vertical dimensions of urban forms. NOB and BA exhibit overlaps in representing
urban form, potentially due to the correlation that blocks with a greater number of build-
ings are more likely to have larger areas and this correlation is not always applicable. In
general, the indicator heatmaps show critical differences from each other, indicating that
each indicator has its own unique role in representing the urban forms.

3.4. Embedding 3D urban morphology characteristics by SOMEncoding

Each 3D model sample’s characteristic is encoded by feature vectors which are nor-
malized morphology metrics. Each sample has six sets of feature vectors with different
dimensions, including BFH feature vectors with 3 dimensions, ExtendedBFH feature
vectors with 5 dimensions, Spacemate and Blockshape feature vectors both with 4 di-
mensions, BriefBlockMetric feature vectors with 7 dimensions and HybridBlockMetric
feature vectors with 11 dimensions. Figure 6, shows three kinds of feature vectors based
on BFH, Spacemate, and HybridBlockMetric, taking one sample as an example. The
similarity of the urban models is determined by the distance between their feature vec-
tors. One of the common ways is to calculate the Euclidean distance based on those
feature vectors. Hence similar and diverse cases can be retrieved and ranked based on
their similarity.

During the case retrieval process, the calculated distance based on feature presenta-
tion significantly influences the retrieval results. Context-based encoding can improve
the feature representation (Zhang et al., 2018). Hence, encoding the morphology metrics
within the trained data space ensures better representation and enhances retrieval out-
comes. In this study, we developed SOMEncoding vectors to use in further case retrieval,
instead of using BMU or original feature vectors. In our SOMEncoding method, vectors
are calculated by applying a context-based encoding method that captures the unique
characteristics of a sample relative to the entire data space. In addition to normaliza-
tion, this method encodes urban form morphology metrics based on the corresponding
trained SOM’s BMUs. The feature vectors computed based on SOMEncoding will be
referred to as SOMEncoding vectors. The SOMEncoding process can be described as fol-
lows. For example, for a sample whose feature vector is xi in a SOM map with K nodes,
the SOMEncoding vector is a set of distances between xi and all the SOM node weight
vectors, wj, j = (1, .., K). Hence xi has K dimensions (in our case, 100 dimensions).

The morphology metrics were re-encoded into 100-dimensional SOMEncoding vectors.
We visualized the SOMEncoding vectors by grayscale images in a 10x10 map, taking a
randomly selected block sample as an example (Figure 6), showcasing BFH, Spacemate
and HybridBlockMetric. Figure 6 also showcases the four grey-scale colour maps which
are the top four cases similar in SOMEncoding vectors. The retrieved four grey-scale
colour maps show a high degree of consistency with the target.

SOMEncoding vector offers the advantage of making case retrieval across different
morphology metric sets more comparable. By reducing the heterogeneity between the
morphology metrics, all samples can be represented as vectors in the same dimensions
after encoding. In this way, we mapped a 3D urban form to its corresponding morphology
metrics, then standardised the morphology metrics into feature vectors based on which
we trained SOMs, and then encoded the feature vectors based on the context of trained

17

Figure 6: The figure showcases the feature vectors of three morphology metric sets, visualises the SOMEn-
coding value based on the morphology metrics. The retrieved cases based on SOMEncoding vectors show
high similarity.

SOMs. Finally, we can use the morphology metrics to link more similar and diverse urban
forms through case retrieval.

4. Results

4.1. Mapping between morphology metrics and 3D urban forms

To assess the effectiveness of the six morphology metric sets in capturing urban form
characteristics, we compare the similarities between the retrieved 3D models and the

18

target. Each 3D model is generated based on the target’s morphology metrics using one
of the six metric sets.
In this paper, we select nine cases that vary in morphological
prototypes (Figure 7). Case 1 - Linear block with inner space and consistency - exhibits
long and linear arrangement of low buildings organized in consistent spacing around
an inner block public space. Case 2 - Perforated bar-shaped linear block - exhibits
long structure and bar-like layout. The structure contains rhythmic rectangular voids or
cutouts along its length, which may suggest open courtyards or shared spaces. Case 3 -
Medium density block with staggered buildings - includes buildings in moderate density
and vary in size and height, creating a dynamic rhythm along the linear alignment. Case 4
- Low-density block with fragmented pattern - is characterized by a linear arrangement of
structures, but the buildings are fragmented and irregularly spaced. The buildings appear
to have a relatively consistent height. Case 5 - Block with loose cross-shape buildings
- consists of cross-grid buildings arranged in a loosely spaced grid pattern, allowing for
significant open spaces between structures. Case 6 - Superblock with multiple perimeter
plots - consists of a collection of plots featuring intricate internal subdivisions, resembling
a courtyard or perimeter block configuration. Case 7 - High-density vertical block -
features a dense arrangement of tall buildings with consistent massing and limited spacing
between them, emphasizing verticality and compactness. Case 8 - Low-density block with
irregularly scattered buildings - consists of a scattered arrangement of buildings with
varying orientations and openness between them, formulating an irregular and fragmented
pattern. Case 9 - Triangular sprawled moderate density block - features a triangular
site boundary, with moderate density, irregular spacing and varying building sizes. By
selecting blocks with different prototypes as the test cases of our experiment, we can
enhance the reliability of validation for the morphology metrics in representing diverse
urban forms.

Figure 7: Nine cases vary in morphological prototypes are selected for validating morphology metrics in
representing 3D urban forms.

4.2. Evaluating morphology metrics by comparison

We evaluate the performance of morphology metrics in representing urban form char-
acteristics by retrieving and comparing the 3D models that are retrieved according to

19

our six morphology metrics. The more similar the retrieved 3D models are, the more
effective the morphology metric is. Each of the nine selected cases has six types of mor-
phology metrics and corresponding SOMEncoding vectors, based on which six lists of
3D models are retrieved. We showcase 3D models with the highest similarities to the
target for further validation. For instance, in Figure 8, after setting an urban form target
- case 1, its morphology metrics - HybridBlockMetric, BFH and BriefBlockMetric - are
calculated. Then 3D models with the top similarities are generated according to the tar-
get’s morphology metric sets, respectively. The similarities are calculated based on the
Euclidean distance to the target, with retrieved models ranked by their distances. In this
demonstration using Case 1, 3D models retrieved via the HybridBlockMetric generally
exhibit very high similarities to the target case. The BriefBlockMetric shows comparable
performance to the HybridBlockMetric, though the second and fourth cases demonstrate
lower similarity. Models retrieved using BFH, however, include dissimilar examples, such
as the third, fourth, and fifth models.

Figure 8: HybridBlockMetric, BFH and BriefBlockMetric are derived from the target, and are used to
retrieve 3D models. The figure showcases the top 5 similar 3D models. The Euclidean distance to the
target represents their similarity; therefore, the smaller the distance, the more similar the two cases are.

In Figure 9, case 2 is set as the target. The 3D models retrieved using the Hybrid-
BlockMetric exhibit a high degree of similarity to the target, all displaying structures
with rhythmic rectangular voids or cutouts along their long sides. In contrast, models
retrieved using Spacemate demonstrate significantly different patterns. Models retrieved
via the BlockShape metric retain the elongated and linear block shape but exhibit varied
building layouts. The BriefBlockMetric achieves a level of performance comparable to
the HybridBlockMetric but remains slightly lower; for example, the second and fourth
models in the first row appear less similar to the target.

In Figure 10, case 8 is set as the target. Retrieving similar urban forms to case 8
is more challenging due to the relatively irregular pattern, characterized by scattered
arrangements, varying orientations, and open spaces between buildings. The BlockShape

20

Figure 9: The figure shows the results of comparisons between HybridBlockMetric, BriefBlockMetric,
Spacemate, BlockShape and ExtendedBFH. The target is case 2 - a perforated bar-shaped linear block.
We compare the performance of the 5 morphology metric sets by comparing the general similarity of the
retrieved 3D block-scale models.

and ExtendedBFH metrics largely fail to capture this complexity, as most of the retrieved
3D models display significantly different urban forms. Among the models retrieved using
Spacemate, only two or three exhibit some resemblance to the target. In contrast, the
3D models retrieved via the HybridBlockMetric once again demonstrate a high degree of

21

similarity to the target, despite the challenges posed by the irregular urban form. Hy-
bridBlockMetric demonstrates superior performance in effectively capturing and compre-
hensively describing the characteristics of 3D blocks, as evidenced by these two examples,
in comparison to other morphology metric sets.

Figure 10: The figure shows the results of comparisons between HybridBlockMetric, BriefBlockMetric,
Spacemate, BlockShape and ExtendedBFH. The target is case 8 - a low-density block with irregularly
scattered buildings.

Figure 11 presents the 3D models retrieved using the HybridBlockMetric for our
selected nine cases. Additional results retrieved using other morphology metric sets are

22

provided in Appendix A.

Figure 11: Case retrieval results for the nine selected cases based on HybridBlockMetric. The 3D models
in grey boxes are the targets, and the seven retrieved models showcased have the highest similarity
indexes.

23

Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{10.4,0.3,0.85}相似度:0.0208496高密容:{10.4,0.3,0.83}相似度:0.0246642高密容:{10.3,0.3,0.82}相似度:0.0270386高密容:{8.2,0.29,0.67}相似度:0.0275709高密容:{12.6,0.31,0.98}相似度:0.0301459高密容:{7.9,0.29,0.66}相似度:0.0321779高密容:{10.6,0.3,0.86}相似度:0.0326733高密容:{3.7,0.27,0.34}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{10.4,0.3,0.85}相似度:0.0589772高密容:{12.,0.31,0.85}相似度:0.0956538高密容:{10.5,0.29,0.7}相似度:0.0957689高密容:{10.7,0.3,0.79}相似度:0.0995381高密容:{14.3,0.32,1.17}相似度:0.100422高密容:{10.4,0.31,0.8}相似度:0.111516高密容:{10.9,0.31,0.8}相似度:0.127911高密容:{8.9,0.29,0.72}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{10.4,0.3,0.85}相似度:0.000775802高密容:{9.9,0.33,0.85}相似度:0.0087532高密容:{10.6,0.31,0.87}相似度:0.0171872高密容:{11.2,0.33,0.89}相似度:0.0172477高密容:{9.1,0.36,0.89}相似度:0.0186907高密容:{10.4,0.32,0.82}相似度:0.0218277高密容:{10.7,0.34,0.9}相似度:0.034412高密容:{10.7,0.34,0.93}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{10.4,0.3,0.85}相似度:0.0420822高密容:{12.,0.3,0.8}相似度:0.0454858高密容:{8.6,0.29,0.66}相似度:0.0483149高密容:{8.6,0.29,0.65}相似度:0.0526475高密容:{10.2,0.29,0.66}相似度:0.0547951高密容:{13.4,0.3,0.86}相似度:0.0573107高密容:{9.9,0.3,0.78}相似度:0.0594293高密容:{11.4,0.3,0.85}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{10.4,0.3,0.85}相似度:0.105458高密容:{11.8,0.32,0.92}相似度:0.111924高密容:{13.7,0.4,0.97}相似度:0.118494高密容:{9.5,0.31,0.78}相似度:0.119915高密容:{12.,0.3,0.84}相似度:0.131962高密容:{11.7,0.31,0.81}相似度:0.138222高密容:{11.6,0.34,0.82}相似度:0.145166高密容:{7.8,0.28,0.6}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{10.4,0.3,0.85}相似度:0.0687848高密容:{9.5,0.31,0.78}相似度:0.106409高密容:{10.6,0.3,0.78}相似度:0.114194高密容:{10.6,0.32,0.75}相似度:0.122215高密容:{10.4,0.32,0.76}相似度:0.12411高密容:{9.2,0.32,0.76}相似度:0.132195高密容:{10.7,0.31,0.82}相似度:0.148176高密容:{9.6,0.29,0.69}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{22.6,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.0448545高密容:{172.,15.14,220.74}相似度:0.0567467高密容:{165.,13.84,198.62}相似度:0.0871061高密容:{22.6,0.49,3.56}相似度:0.102465高密容:{22.3,0.47,3.36}相似度:0.114049高密容:{175.,13.62,189.85}相似度:0.122399高密容:{22.6,0.46,3.15}相似度:0.146817高密容:{22.4,0.44,2.86}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{22.6,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.198613高密容:{21.9,0.44,2.89}相似度:0.210962高密容:{22.7,0.49,3.33}相似度:0.293967高密容:{21.6,0.43,2.41}相似度:0.338154高密容:{24.4,0.51,3.4}相似度:0.345281高密容:{22.8,0.45,2.07}相似度:0.402355高密容:{21.8,0.43,2.52}相似度:0.440182高密容:{22.1,0.4,2.49}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{22.6,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.211767高密容:{24.,0.45,3.21}相似度:0.343036高密容:{22.7,0.44,3.14}相似度:0.365901高密容:{22.7,0.45,3.03}相似度:0.408351高密容:{69.4,0.51,3.54}相似度:0.472363高密容:{25.4,0.41,2.45}相似度:0.476124高密容:{24.1,0.42,2.67}相似度:0.505942高密容:{22.5,0.26,1.84}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{22.6,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.0164796高密容:{50.3,0.47,3.42}相似度:0.028511高密容:{54.3,0.49,3.6}相似度:0.0315118高密容:{49.2,0.52,3.94}相似度:0.0329794高密容:{50.3,0.47,3.33}相似度:0.0332319高密容:{58.4,0.47,3.47}相似度:0.0340378高密容:{68.9,0.55,4.42}相似度:0.0348237高密容:{24.5,0.47,3.27}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{22.6,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.110958高密容:{24.5,0.4,2.52}相似度:0.187929高密容:{25.5,0.43,3.03}相似度:0.202459高密容:{22.5,0.39,2.42}相似度:0.241806高密容:{24.1,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.253649高密容:{21.2,0.45,3.01}相似度:0.261501高密容:{26.5,0.45,3.47}相似度:0.262692高密容:{22.1,0.4,2.49}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{22.6,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.112762高密容:{21.2,0.45,3.01}相似度:0.21278高密容:{25.4,0.51,4.14}相似度:0.254203高密容:{25.5,0.43,3.03}相似度:0.263245高密容:{24.1,0.48,3.51}相似度:0.267609高密容:{24.,0.45,3.21}相似度:0.350892高密容:{22.4,0.4,2.67}相似度:0.353175高密容:{26.5,0.45,3.47}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{62.7,0.43,4.03}相似度:0.0162015高密容:{51.9,0.41,3.42}相似度:0.0179624高密容:{116.7,0.54,7.3}相似度:0.0215663高密容:{96.9,0.5,6.15}相似度:0.0363098高密容:{98.5,0.49,6.11}相似度:0.0373215高密容:{59.5,0.43,3.76}相似度:0.0386386高密容:{85.8,0.48,5.55}相似度:0.0398761高密容:{92.5,0.5,5.53}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{62.7,0.43,4.03}相似度:0.118697高密容:{133.8,0.55,8.42}相似度:0.132561高密容:{104.3,0.47,6.63}相似度:0.141692高密容:{150.5,0.56,9.08}相似度:0.148118高密容:{90.2,0.47,4.6}相似度:0.166861高密容:{169.,0.62,9.08}相似度:0.184348高密容:{139.,0.51,6.53}相似度:0.198435高密容:{110.8,0.46,5.53}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{62.7,0.43,4.03}相似度:0.185279高密容:{68.5,0.58,4.2}相似度:0.525255高密容:{87.7,0.42,4.98}相似度:0.564013高密容:{29.,0.46,2.66}相似度:0.661407高密容:{57.,0.45,3.71}相似度:0.70992高密容:{20.7,0.41,1.97}相似度:0.765355高密容:{69.4,0.51,3.54}相似度:0.800648高密容:{22.5,0.38,2.04}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{62.7,0.43,4.03}相似度:0.0211499高密容:{90.,0.44,4.27}相似度:0.0309574高密容:{103.,0.56,7.77}相似度:0.0405098高密容:{182.,0.49,5.44}相似度:0.0413666高密容:{105.,0.47,5.49}相似度:0.0459556高密容:{61.7,0.41,3.41}相似度:0.048716高密容:{65.,0.44,4.33}相似度:0.0540241高密容:{39.,0.41,3.26}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{62.7,0.43,4.03}相似度:0.114839高密容:{70.4,0.44,4.15}相似度:0.139282高密容:{91.1,0.46,4.64}相似度:0.142552高密容:{72.2,0.46,5.28}相似度:0.162666高密容:{71.7,0.41,3.22}相似度:0.165227高密容:{50.6,0.61,5.15}相似度:0.167042高密容:{88.7,0.66,8.03}相似度:0.172156高密容:{112.2,0.5,4.5}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{62.7,0.43,4.03}相似度:0.151208高密容:{69.9,0.49,4.73}相似度:0.159238高密容:{72.2,0.46,5.28}相似度:0.193721高密容:{90.7,0.54,6.18}相似度:0.209067高密容:{50.8,0.47,3.74}相似度:0.223815高密容:{68.6,0.47,3.64}相似度:0.224411高密容:{63.3,0.43,3.71}相似度:0.243418高密容:{96.9,0.5,6.15}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{19.,0.31,1.28}相似度:0.0655238高密容:{14.9,0.24,0.68}相似度:0.0770277高密容:{14.2,0.23,0.7}相似度:0.0885681高密容:{15.3,0.25,0.69}相似度:0.0970231高密容:{12.5,0.2,0.49}相似度:0.099958高密容:{13.4,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.103244高密容:{12.2,0.2,0.47}相似度:0.109279高密容:{13.2,0.21,0.54}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{19.,0.31,1.28}相似度:0.335836高密容:{19.8,0.33,1.15}相似度:0.383738高密容:{18.6,0.32,0.88}相似度:0.3992高密容:{16.2,0.3,1.24}相似度:0.416053高密容:{14.7,0.28,0.65}相似度:0.441114高密容:{16.9,0.32,0.91}相似度:0.492089高密容:{20.4,0.34,1.63}相似度:0.521404高密容:{15.7,0.29,1.06}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{19.,0.31,1.28}相似度:0.00710683高密容:{20.8,0.36,1.26}相似度:0.013699高密容:{18.,0.29,1.31}相似度:0.0207522高密容:{20.1,0.34,1.22}相似度:0.0215386高密容:{21.3,0.32,1.25}相似度:0.0228046高密容:{21.2,0.28,1.34}相似度:0.0247589高密容:{19.,0.33,1.21}相似度:0.0284209高密容:{19.9,0.34,1.34}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{19.,0.31,1.28}相似度:0.161343高密容:{17.,0.3,1.21}相似度:0.205061高密容:{14.6,0.3,1.16}相似度:0.284369高密容:{21.1,0.31,1.19}相似度:0.29162高密容:{17.3,0.32,1.34}相似度:0.301126高密容:{14.6,0.29,1.15}相似度:0.344273高密容:{30.4,0.29,1.21}相似度:0.350775高密容:{11.3,0.28,1.03}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{19.,0.31,1.28}相似度:0.233738高密容:{23.,0.31,1.32}相似度:0.275161高密容:{14.6,0.35,1.38}相似度:0.299433高密容:{15.3,0.38,1.46}相似度:0.35308高密容:{15.6,0.36,1.36}相似度:0.368161高密容:{14.3,0.39,1.45}相似度:0.370181高密容:{14.4,0.43,1.59}相似度:0.38397高密容:{19.1,0.39,1.48}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{19.,0.31,1.28}相似度:0.428421高密容:{15.6,0.36,1.36}相似度:0.445702高密容:{14.3,0.39,1.45}相似度:0.477699高密容:{14.7,0.4,1.47}相似度:0.479461高密容:{15.4,0.37,1.39}相似度:0.513069高密容:{20.7,0.36,1.26}相似度:0.523804高密容:{19.4,0.36,1.44}相似度:0.531266高密容:{17.,0.27,1.09}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{54.,0.13,1.5}相似度:0.00918732高密容:{46.6,0.18,1.49}相似度:0.0157337高密容:{59.,0.1,1.42}相似度:0.0284423高密容:{44.5,0.19,1.57}相似度:0.0323694高密容:{48.6,0.17,1.38}相似度:0.0388718高密容:{54.5,0.13,1.31}相似度:0.0551842高密容:{59.4,0.1,1.17}相似度:0.0631318高密容:{60.,0.1,1.1}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{54.,0.13,1.5}相似度:0.071733高密容:{54.6,0.12,1.32}相似度:0.244398高密容:{67.4,0.09,1.49}相似度:0.247416高密容:{26.9,0.31,1.53}相似度:0.276126高密容:{48.,0.21,1.1}相似度:0.298025高密容:{54.7,0.1,1.}相似度:0.29946高密容:{56.4,0.12,1.62}相似度:0.325323高密容:{61.9,0.11,1.11}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{54.,0.13,1.5}相似度:0.163054高密容:{20.1,0.41,1.47}相似度:0.291436高密容:{16.5,0.35,0.84}相似度:0.312192高密容:{29.5,0.28,1.16}相似度:0.321228高密容:{22.8,0.42,1.95}相似度:0.391416高密容:{48.,0.21,1.1}相似度:0.398372高密容:{16.,0.05,0.26}相似度:0.492644高密容:{29.,0.57,2.4}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{54.,0.13,1.5}相似度:0.0243843高密容:{54.1,0.17,1.66}相似度:0.0345989高密容:{53.5,0.19,1.45}相似度:0.0419365高密容:{42.8,0.25,1.62}相似度:0.0514598高密容:{43.2,0.11,1.1}相似度:0.0524126高密容:{59.,0.1,1.42}相似度:0.0606164高密容:{56.,0.14,1.21}相似度:0.0636947高密容:{21.3,0.25,1.76}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{54.,0.13,1.5}相似度:0.316159高密容:{49.6,0.24,2.71}相似度:0.356144高密容:{50.3,0.14,1.41}相似度:0.358115高密容:{66.3,0.21,3.15}相似度:0.480436高密容:{79.5,0.63,12.2}相似度:0.484479高密容:{79.8,0.66,6.29}相似度:0.492765高密容:{130.,0.8,20.35}相似度:0.512393高密容:{63.,0.39,5.58}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{54.,0.13,1.5}相似度:0.280242高密容:{49.6,0.24,2.71}相似度:0.32721高密容:{50.3,0.14,1.41}相似度:0.331777高密容:{60.3,0.16,1.94}相似度:0.38568高密容:{42.6,0.2,1.75}相似度:0.434905高密容:{60.,0.22,2.38}相似度:0.439281高密容:{49.4,0.31,2.56}相似度:0.479867高密容:{78.,0.24,3.41}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{15.,0.41,1.11}相似度:0.0695641高密容:{13.8,0.42,1.07}相似度:0.0919759高密容:{17.2,0.39,1.27}相似度:0.0961884高密容:{14.,0.42,1.09}相似度:0.115263高密容:{11.1,0.45,0.87}相似度:0.115808高密容:{14.9,0.41,1.18}相似度:0.117437高密容:{19.2,0.37,1.43}相似度:0.124795高密容:{15.8,0.4,1.17}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{15.,0.41,1.11}相似度:0.0669492高密容:{15.9,0.35,1.33}相似度:0.108152高密容:{20.,0.35,1.25}相似度:0.122574高密容:{19.7,0.36,1.19}相似度:0.124256高密容:{17.5,0.41,1.17}相似度:0.129612高密容:{17.5,0.32,0.83}相似度:0.131272高密容:{15.2,0.37,1.34}相似度:0.141055高密容:{20.7,0.3,0.93}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{15.,0.41,1.11}相似度:0.0575114高密容:{60.,0.1,1.55}相似度:0.306249高密容:{29.4,0.29,0.76}相似度:0.391485高密容:{25.8,0.34,1.07}相似度:0.395216高密容:{19.1,0.58,1.85}相似度:0.521975高密容:{21.,0.29,0.99}相似度:0.553514高密容:{14.6,0.34,0.97}相似度:0.574136高密容:{57.6,0.14,0.87}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{15.,0.41,1.11}相似度:0.0487559高密容:{16.8,0.4,1.19}相似度:0.0503955高密容:{12.4,0.4,1.18}相似度:0.0553479高密容:{10.6,0.42,1.}相似度:0.0581684高密容:{13.2,0.42,1.05}相似度:0.0636684高密容:{15.8,0.4,1.17}相似度:0.0671052高密容:{13.8,0.41,1.07}相似度:0.0876084高密容:{9.2,0.42,1.02}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{15.,0.41,1.11}相似度:0.168581高密容:{20.7,0.3,0.93}相似度:0.176356高密容:{20.1,0.35,0.93}相似度:0.18297高密容:{20.2,0.43,1.26}相似度:0.183488高密容:{16.3,0.31,1.19}相似度:0.197218高密容:{26.8,0.4,1.46}相似度:0.220972高密容:{24.3,0.38,1.21}相似度:0.228271高密容:{17.5,0.41,1.17}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{15.,0.41,1.11}相似度:0.180266高密容:{20.2,0.43,1.26}相似度:0.180852高密容:{20.1,0.35,0.93}相似度:0.197058高密容:{20.7,0.3,0.93}相似度:0.198029高密容:{19.6,0.28,0.74}相似度:0.203081高密容:{11.,0.35,0.83}相似度:0.221094高密容:{21.8,0.34,0.98}相似度:0.227491高密容:{17.5,0.41,1.17}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{79.9,0.46,4.34}相似度:0.0136147高密容:{59.1,0.42,3.42}相似度:0.0208794高密容:{79.1,0.46,4.39}相似度:0.0216129高密容:{57.7,0.42,3.33}相似度:0.0266488高密容:{76.1,0.45,4.32}相似度:0.0273189高密容:{150.,0.61,7.35}相似度:0.0364767高密容:{169.,0.62,9.08}相似度:0.0377325高密容:{71.1,0.44,3.81}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{79.9,0.46,4.34}相似度:0.0647995高密容:{88.7,0.49,4.75}相似度:0.0707657高密容:{87.7,0.45,4.6}相似度:0.0964601高密容:{82.3,0.43,4.26}相似度:0.108167高密容:{133.1,0.56,9.03}相似度:0.115121高密容:{104.,0.51,4.76}相似度:0.120043高密容:{96.9,0.5,6.15}相似度:0.122863高密容:{85.,0.45,5.29}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{79.9,0.46,4.34}相似度:0.191909高密容:{95.6,0.47,5.27}相似度:0.207213高密容:{54.6,0.45,4.62}相似度:0.231388高密容:{29.9,0.66,4.96}相似度:0.236036高密容:{52.9,0.53,5.11}相似度:0.282948高密容:{81.7,0.46,5.64}相似度:0.28937高密容:{38.,0.57,3.99}相似度:0.290393高密容:{36.8,0.61,5.64}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{79.9,0.46,4.34}相似度:0.0236729高密容:{46.4,0.44,3.79}相似度:0.03128高密容:{71.1,0.44,3.81}相似度:0.032812高密容:{92.5,0.5,5.53}相似度:0.0340753高密容:{89.1,0.41,3.23}相似度:0.0354404高密容:{62.2,0.46,4.16}相似度:0.0385291高密容:{150.,0.61,7.35}相似度:0.046391高密容:{69.1,0.45,4.19}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{79.9,0.46,4.34}相似度:0.167278高密容:{76.1,0.53,5.81}相似度:0.171414高密容:{113.,0.61,7.96}相似度:0.187513高密容:{95.4,0.42,4.17}相似度:0.195396高密容:{95.,0.59,6.78}相似度:0.199147高密容:{88.7,0.49,4.75}相似度:0.206103高密容:{69.3,0.51,4.1}相似度:0.209017高密容:{89.9,0.47,3.95}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{79.9,0.46,4.34}相似度:0.125562高密容:{113.,0.61,7.96}相似度:0.190743高密容:{88.7,0.49,4.75}相似度:0.205383高密容:{103.,0.56,7.77}相似度:0.214786高密容:{120.8,0.51,9.21}相似度:0.225675高密容:{90.8,0.45,4.48}相似度:0.2308高密容:{92.1,0.49,6.99}相似度:0.23724高密容:{81.7,0.48,5.09}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{13.4,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.0197321高密容:{12.2,0.2,0.47}相似度:0.0364058高密容:{18.3,0.3,1.22}相似度:0.0469521高密容:{12.7,0.21,0.57}相似度:0.0507362高密容:{15.8,0.26,0.94}相似度:0.0645245高密容:{11.4,0.19,0.43}相似度:0.0660797高密容:{15.3,0.25,0.9}相似度:0.0722066高密容:{12.2,0.2,0.56}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{13.4,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.0841155高密容:{12.8,0.21,0.68}相似度:0.266239高密容:{9.6,0.17,0.45}相似度:0.292437高密容:{14.5,0.25,0.77}相似度:0.350512高密容:{10.2,0.19,0.51}相似度:0.350671高密容:{12.1,0.23,0.71}相似度:0.352471高密容:{11.4,0.21,0.53}相似度:0.356622高密容:{12.4,0.21,0.67}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{13.4,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.0601504高密容:{8.2,0.22,0.52}相似度:0.0839217高密容:{8.9,0.23,0.57}相似度:0.0951561高密容:{8.9,0.18,0.47}相似度:0.120017高密容:{10.4,0.16,0.43}相似度:0.137606高密容:{10.6,0.27,0.75}相似度:0.146997高密容:{8.2,0.25,0.57}相似度:0.149671高密容:{10.3,0.24,0.7}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{13.4,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.0222473高密容:{11.7,0.22,0.58}相似度:0.022612高密容:{10.5,0.22,0.58}相似度:0.0263976高密容:{9.2,0.21,0.51}相似度:0.0271669高密容:{9.4,0.21,0.52}相似度:0.0306293高密容:{9.6,0.21,0.5}相似度:0.0319056高密容:{9.7,0.22,0.56}相似度:0.0329468高密容:{10.2,0.21,0.54}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{13.4,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.160563高密容:{11.,0.23,0.63}相似度:0.223241高密容:{9.6,0.18,0.45}相似度:0.225483高密容:{9.,0.21,0.48}相似度:0.231734高密容:{12.,0.28,0.76}相似度:0.240838高密容:{10.3,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.242402高密容:{9.2,0.23,0.48}相似度:0.242426高密容:{9.6,0.2,0.42}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{13.4,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.189114高密容:{11.,0.23,0.63}相似度:0.204284高密容:{9.6,0.2,0.42}相似度:0.208958高密容:{10.3,0.22,0.6}相似度:0.209359高密容:{12.3,0.23,0.69}相似度:0.218167高密容:{10.8,0.23,0.62}相似度:0.261601高密容:{11.4,0.21,0.53}相似度:0.287434高密容:{11.5,0.23,0.61}Out[]=Indicators:HGF相似度:0.高密容:{24.2,0.38,2.15}相似度:0.0418461高密容:{26.9,0.41,2.63}相似度:0.106407高密容:{46.6,0.61,6.26}相似度:0.107227高密容:{45.,0.62,5.8}相似度:0.136352高密容:{24.4,0.38,2.16}相似度:0.1435高密容:{39.,0.54,5.3}相似度:0.16634高密容:{52.4,0.72,7.78}相似度:0.185766高密容:{26.6,0.4,2.66}Indicators:HGFBA相似度:0.高密容:{24.2,0.38,2.15}相似度:0.242545高密容:{29.3,0.49,1.07}相似度:0.287056高密容:{31.5,0.33,1.09}相似度:0.309703高密容:{35.2,0.39,1.8}相似度:0.312592高密容:{39.6,0.32,1.45}相似度:0.325145高密容:{40.1,0.27,1.53}相似度:0.356033高密容:{60.4,0.34,1.75}相似度:0.36193高密容:{57.,0.17,0.57}Indicators:ABCS相似度:0.高密容:{24.2,0.38,2.15}相似度:0.206002高密容:{19.,0.23,0.78}相似度:0.30236高密容:{9.6,0.26,0.63}相似度:0.320165高密容:{49.4,0.28,1.7}相似度:0.334398高密容:{39.9,0.09,0.86}相似度:0.380213高密容:{36.8,0.28,1.14}相似度:0.395479高密容:{18.7,0.27,1.42}相似度:0.432644高密容:{54.3,0.19,0.73}Indicators:LFGO相似度:0.高密容:{24.2,0.38,2.15}相似度:0.304256高密容:{20.,0.41,2.54}相似度:0.387168高密容:{21.1,0.37,2.06}相似度:0.407574高密容:{20.3,0.38,2.}相似度:0.419978高密容:{20.8,0.4,2.27}相似度:0.492476高密容:{20.2,0.41,2.35}相似度:0.504728高密容:{20.,0.39,2.12}相似度:0.517869高密容:{397.,2.72,43.46}Indicators:MVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{24.2,0.38,2.15}相似度:0.210726高密容:{44.3,0.41,1.84}相似度:0.239889高密容:{41.6,0.43,1.71}相似度:0.291123高密容:{67.6,0.6,2.69}相似度:0.325339高密容:{35.2,0.39,1.8}相似度:0.33139高密容:{47.,0.27,1.2}相似度:0.37107高密容:{42.,0.29,1.6}相似度:0.385476高密容:{60.4,0.34,1.75}Indicators:HGFMMVWCHBA相似度:0.高密容:{24.2,0.38,2.15}相似度:0.408115高密容:{60.4,0.34,1.75}相似度:0.502355高密容:{24.4,0.43,2.23}相似度:0.520045高密容:{35.2,0.39,1.8}相似度:0.545839高密容:{41.6,0.43,1.71}相似度:0.60548高密容:{26.,0.36,1.83}相似度:0.607157高密容:{40.1,0.27,1.53}相似度:0.607744高密容:{46.4,0.28,1.44}}}高密容{13.4,0.22,0.6}}Case 1Case 2Case 3Case 4Case 5Case 6Case 7Case 8Case 9Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:Similarity:BFH:For case 3, retrieved models demonstrate a good level of similarity, capturing the
medium-density, staggered building arrangement. Some variations in height and spacing,
but the overall form remains consistent. For case 4, the retrieved models have elongated
and fragmented layouts. Though some retrieved models show different orientations, the
building layouts are still similar to the target. For case 5, the retrieved models successfully
capture the cross-shaped blocks and their spacing. However, a few models (the first,
sixth and last models) show variations in density and building volume. For case 6, the
retrieved models present distinct characteristics of the targeted block: multiple plots with
courtyard or perimeter plot configurations. Slight variations in internal plot layouts and
block boundaries are present but do not significantly impact the overall similarity. For
case 7, high similarity is observed, with retrieved models effectively replicating the dense,
vertically dominant buildings. The arrangement and height variations closely match the
target. For case 9, the retrieved models replicate the triangular form and curved block
boundary to some extent, though variations in building arrangement reduce the overall
resemblance. However, given that the urban form of case 9 is inherently challenging
to define using computational rules, the retrieval results demonstrate the advantages
of HybridBlockMetric. In summary, the 3D models retrieved using HybridBlockMetric
demonstrate a high level of similarity to the target urban form prototypes while also
capturing a diverse and rich variety of urban forms.

What we established by observing the results of the case retrievals is that the UMI
combinations have combinatorial effects in identifying and representing 3D urban forms.
HybridBlockMetric has good performance in comprehensively capturing the character-
istics and complexity of 3D blocks, delivering consistently stable performance across all
nine cases. It effectively represents diverse morphological prototypes and retrieves 3D
blocks that are both highly similar to the target and relatively rich and diverse in urban
forms. By leveraging the morphology metrics explored in this study, the proposed Hy-
bridBlockMetric demonstrates robust and convincing performance in representing urban
form characteristics.

5. Discussion

5.1. Contributions

Urban morphology indicators have a combinatorial effect in representing urban forms.
The results demonstrate that our study provides innovative approaches that enable the
bi-directional bridging between 3D block-scale urban models and morphology metrics.
Further, our study provides approaches for evaluating the effectiveness of different mor-
phology metrics in representing 3D urban form characteristics. The results also show
that our proposed HybridBlockMetric can represent volumetric block-scale urban form
characteristics in terms of prototype similarity and morphological diversity. We outline
our contributions:

1. Our methodology offers a systematic way for deriving morphology metrics from 3D
urban models, facilitating both the characterization and generation of urban form.
It enables the flexible retrieval of a diverse range of 3D models with similar urban
morphology based on given morphology metrics derived from 3D block-scale models,
linking urban form and morphology metrics bi-directionally. As the morphology
metric set can include UMI for performance evaluation, the capability allows for
the integration of performance evaluation with urban form generation to advance
the automation of performance-driven computational urban design.

24

2. We extend morphology metrics to better represent urban morphology, transitioning
from 2D to 3D. The vertical dimension indicators represent not only height and its
derivatives but also aggregated relationships between vertical and horizontal dimen-
sions, such as GWHR and CAR. We propose an innovative SOMEncoding method
to encode morphology metric values based on the trained data space, allowing for
a more context-based representation of 3D model characteristics. As a result, our
approach effectively represents 3D block-scale urban morphology characteristics in
digital models.

3. Our systematic approaches offer a comparative method to evaluate block-scale mor-
phology metrics for representing urban form characteristics. Based on the aforemen-
tioned metric-to-form model, the effectiveness of morphology metrics in representing
urban form can be evaluated intuitively. By comparing our selected morphology
metrics, we found that HybridBlockMetric represents block-scale 3D models effec-
tively, making it a valuable finding for supporting further urban planning and design
digitalization.

5.2. Directions for future work

Our study offers great potential to bridge the generation of improved urban form and
optimized morphology metrics in performance-driven urban computational design. We
proposed a methodology for establishing bi-directional links between morphology metrics
and 3D urban forms and evaluated the performance of these morphology metrics. Many of
the UMIs that constitute our morphology metrics are derived from urban form indicators
primarily used for energy analysis, such as microclimate analysis.

In the further extensions, when our proposed approaches are applied to other urban
form datasets, additional specific UMIs can be incorporated and further examined accord-
ing to the characteristics of those urban forms. Using a case study of performance-driven
design is helpful to extend our work, applying our approaches to retrieved 3D urban form
models based on optimized morphology metrics with enhanced performance evaluation.
For instance, by simulating and storing the energy performance of these blocks based on
the morphology metrics, we can further provide improved urban form models with better
energy profiles according to the input urban form types. In that way, energy implications
of different urban forms can be further investigated, hence achieving a comprehensive
digital link between urban form generation and design impact analysis. Integrating en-
ergy simulation into the framework can provide urban designers and planners with tools
to assess the environmental impacts of their designs in real-time, fostering sustainable
and efficient urban development.

6. Conclusion

The accelerating digitalization in urban planning and design underscores the impor-
tance of bi-directional links between intangible urban forms and tangible quantifications
in digital models, such as real-time interactions for urban form generation and design
impact analysis. This work, focusing on 3D block-scale urban forms and their morphol-
ogy metrics, presents approaches for evaluating morphology metrics and associating them
with 3D models that have similar urban forms. Our methodology has innovative con-
tributions in encoding morphology metrics, evaluating morphology metrics in effectively
representing features in 3D urban forms, and digitally coupling morphology metrics and
3D urban forms.

25

First, we extracted morphology metrics from block-scale 3D urban models, including
UMIs that describe height, surface ratio, block content, and 2D block shape characteris-
tics. The height and height variant information is included in the morphology metrics.
The results demonstrate that our morphology metrics represented well the vertical di-
mensions of the complex 3D blocks. The 3D models were then clustered based on these
morphology metrics using self-organizing maps (SOMs). We utilized SOMs not only for
clustering but also for deeper encoding of the morphology metrics. Conceptually simi-
lar to Word2Vec techniques, meaningful representations for semantics are based on the
context. We leverage the trained SOMs as advanced contexts to further encode the mor-
phology metrics, hence better representing urban form characteristics in a context-aware
manner.

Second, by integrating case retrieval techniques, our approach effectively associates
morphology metrics with urban forms that are both similar and diverse, introducing a
novel method in the field. Using the SOM encoding vectors, case retrieval results demon-
strate high consistency in prototype similarity and morphological diversity, effectively
addressing the representation of complex and intangible urban forms. By using this ap-
proach as a bridge, we can translate our target urban form and morphology metrics into
high-level quantifications, and then, conversely, generate more urban form models that
are similar to the target and maintain the diversity.

Third, our methodology provides a comparative approach to evaluating specific mor-
phology metrics in representing targeted 3D urban forms. We emphasize the importance
of developing morphology metrics that can be programmatically linked with 3D forms.
Using our metric-to-form approach, we can evaluate the performance of morphology met-
rics based on the retrieved 3D forms. In our case, by comparing six morphology metrics,
our HybridBlockMetric effectively represents block-scale 3D models. This approach is
flexible and general, making it easily applicable for other evaluation purposes or datasets.
In summary, in this study, our approach provides a general and flexible way to formu-
late and evaluate morphology metrics for urban form in 3D block-scale models. Among
the tested morphology metrics, HybridBlockMetric is a computable metric based on which
numerous urban forms that are similar in prototype and rich in morphology can be re-
trieved. Our approach establishes the coupling between urban form and morphology
metrics through a systematic methodology that simultaneously enables the characteriza-
tion, generation, and performance evaluation of urban form. This methodology supports
the derivation of morphology metrics from 3D models and the generation of improved
urban form with enhanced performance evaluation.

Acknowledgements

Part of this research was conducted at the Future Cities Lab Global at Singapore-
ETH Centre. Future Cities Lab Global is supported and funded by the National Research
Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence
and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme and ETH Zurich (ETHZ). Part of
this research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
project (No.52378008).

CRediT author statement

Chenyi Cai: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, In-
vestigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Biao

26

Li: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition.
Qiyan Zhang: Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Xiao Wang: Writing – re-
view & editing. Filip Biljecki: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. Pieter
Herthogs: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition.

References

Anderson, W.P., Kanaroglou, P.S., Miller, E.J., 1996. Urban form, energy and the envi-

ronment: a review of issues, evidence and policy. Urban studies 33, 7–35.

Basaraner, M., Cetinkaya, S., 2017. Performance of shape indices and classification
schemes for characterising perceptual shape complexity of building footprints in gis.
International Journal of Geographical Information Science 31, 1952–1977.

Batty, M., 1976. Urban modelling. Cambridge University Press Cambridge.

Batty, M., 1991. Generating urban forms from diffusive growth. Environment and Plan-

ning A 23, 511–544.

Batty, M., Longley, P.A., 1994. Fractal cities: a geometry of form and function. Academic

press.

Berghauser Pont, M., Haupt, P., 2005. The Spacemate: Density and the typomorphology

of the urban fabric. Nordic Journal of Architectural Research 4, 55–68.

Berghauser Pont, M., Haupt, P., 2021. Spacematrix - Space, Density and Urban Form.

Biljecki, F., Chow, Y.S., 2022. Global Building Morphology Indicators. Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems 95, 101809. doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2022.
101809.

Biljecki, F., Chow, Y.S., Lee, K., 2023. Quality of crowdsourced geospatial building infor-
mation: A global assessment of OpenStreetMap attributes. Building and Environment
237, 110295.

Bramley, G., Power, S., 2009. Urban form and social sustainability: the role of density
and housing type. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 36, 30–48.

Bruyns, G.J., Higgins, C.D., Nel, D.H., 2021. Urban volumetrics: From vertical to
volumetric urbanisation and its extensions to empirical morphological analysis. Urban
Studies 58, 922–940.

Burian, S.J., Maddula, S.R.K., Velugubantla, S.P., Brown, M.J., 2002. Morphological
analyses using 3D building databases: Albuquerque, New Mexico. Technical Report.
LA-UR-02-6198, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico.

Cai, C., Guo, Z., Zhang, B., Wang, X., Li, B., Tang, P., 2021. Urban morphological
feature extraction and multi-dimensional similarity analysis based on deep learning
approaches. Sustainability 13, 6859.

Cai, C., Zaghloul, M., Li, B., 2022. Data clustering in urban computational modeling by
integrated geometry and imagery features for probabilistic navigation. Applied Sciences
12, 12704.

27

Canuto, R., Koenig, R., Chronis, A., Galanos, T., Celani, G., 2024. From performative to
predictive-performative design: A review of current trends in performance-based design
and their impact on urbanism.
International Journal of Architectural Computing ,
14780771241281883.

Chadzynski, A., Li, S., Grisiute, A., Farazi, F., Lindberg, C., Mosbach, S., Herthogs,
P., Kraft, M., 2022. Semantic 3d city agents—an intelligent automation for dynamic
geospatial knowledge graphs. Energy and AI 8, 100137.

Chatzipoulka, C., Compagnon, R., Kaempf, J., Nikolopoulou, M., 2018. Sky view factor
as predictor of solar availability on building fa¸cades. Solar Energy 170, 1026–1038.

Chiaradia, A.J., 2019. Urban morphology/urban form. The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia

of Urban and Regional Studies , 1–6.

Choi, J., Nguyen, P.C.T., Makki, M., 2021. The design of social and cultural orientated
urban tissues through evolutionary processes. International Journal of Architectural
Computing 19, 331–359.

Dibble, J., Prelorendjos, A., Romice, O., Zanella, M., Strano, E., Pagel, M., Porta, S.,
2019. On the origin of spaces: Morphometric foundations of urban form evolution.
Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science 46, 707–730.

Elzeni, M., Elmokadem, A., Badawy, N.M., 2022. Classification of urban morphology
indicators towards urban generation. Port-Said Engineering Research Journal 26, 43–
56.

Gagne, J., Andersen, M., 2012. A generative facade design method based on daylighting

performance goals. Journal of Building Performance Simulation 5, 141–154.

Galster, G., Hanson, R., Ratcliffe, M.R., Wolman, H., Coleman, S., Freihage, J., 2001.
Wrestling sprawl to the ground: defining and measuring an elusive concept. Housing
policy debate 12, 681–717.

Grisiute, A., Silvennoinen, H., Li, S., Chadzynski, A., Raubal, M., Kraft, M.,
Von Richthofen, A., Herthogs, P., 2023. A semantic spatial policy model to automati-
cally calculate allowable gross floor areas in singapore, in: International Conference on
Computer-Aided Architectural Design Futures, Springer. pp. 455–469.

Herfort, B., Lautenbach, S., Porto de Albuquerque, J., Anderson, J., Zipf, A., 2023. A
spatio-temporal analysis investigating completeness and inequalities of global urban
building data in openstreetmap. Nature Communications 14. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-023-39698-6.

Herold, M., Scepan, J., Clarke, K.C., 2002. The use of remote sensing and landscape met-
rics to describe structures and changes in urban land uses. Environment and planning
A 34, 1443–1458.

Hillier, B., Leaman, A., Stansall, P., Bedford, M., 1976. Space syntax. Environment and

Planning B: Planning and design 3, 147–185.

Jabareen, Y.R., 2006. Sustainable urban forms: Their typologies, models, and concepts.

Journal of planning education and research 26, 38–52.

28

Jiang, F., Ma, J., Webster, C.J., Chiaradia, A.J., Zhou, Y., Zhao, Z., Zhang, X., 2024.
Generative urban design: A systematic review on problem formulation, design genera-
tion, and decision-making. Progress in planning 180, 100795.

K¨ampf, J.H., Robinson, D., 2009. Optimisation of urban energy demand using an evo-
lutionary algorithm, in: Proceedings of the Eleventh International IBPSA Conference,
pp. 668–673.

K¨ampf, J.H., Robinson, D., 2010. Optimisation of building form for solar energy utilisa-
tion using constrained evolutionary algorithms. Energy and Buildings 42, 807–814.

Kedron, P., Zhao, Y., Frazier, A.E., 2019. Three dimensional (3d) spatial metrics for

objects. Landscape Ecology 34, 2123–2132.

Koenig, R., Miao, Y., Aichinger, A., Knecht, K., Konieva, K., 2020. Integrating urban
analysis, generative design, and evolutionary optimization for solving urban design
problems. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science 47, 997–
1013.

Kropf, K., 2009. Aspects of urban form. Urban Morphology 13, 105–120. URL: https://
journal.urbanform.org/index.php/jum/article/view/3949, doi:10.51347/jum.
v13i2.3949. number: 2.

Kropf, K., 2018. The handbook of urban morphology. John Wiley & Sons.

Labetski, A., Vitalis, S., Biljecki, F., Arroyo Ohori, K., Stoter, J., 2023. 3d building met-
rics for urban morphology. International Journal of Geographical Information Science
37, 36–67.

Lee, G., Jeong, Y., Kim, S., 2016. Impact of individual traits, urban form, and urban
character on selecting cars as transportation mode using the hierarchical generalized
linear model. Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering 15, 223–230.

Li, J., He, Z., Zhao, B., 2024. A novel method of high-density urban block form generation
based on multi-objective solar performance optimization: A case study of nanjing.
Energy and Buildings , 114878.

Li, J., You, W., Ding, W., 2022. Exploring urban space quantitative indicators associated

with outdoor ventilation potential. Sustainable Cities and Society 79, 103696.

Li, K., Zeng, H., 2024. Multidisciplinary parameters for characterizing the 3D urban
morphology: An overview based on the relational perspective. Sustainable Cities and
Society , 105364doi:10.1016/j.scs.2024.105364.

Liu, S., Fan, X., Wen, Q., Liang, W., Wu, Y., 2014. Simulated impacts of 3d urban
morphology on urban transportation in megacities: case study in beijing. International
Journal of Digital Earth 7, 470–491.

Liu, Y., Chen, C., Li, J., Chen, W.Q., 2020. Characterizing three dimensional (3-d)
morphology of residential buildings by landscape metrics. Landscape Ecology 35, 2587–
2599.

29

Liu, Y., Wu, J., Yu, D., 2017. Characterizing spatiotemporal patterns of air pollution in

china: A multiscale landscape approach. Ecological Indicators 76, 344–356.

Lowry, J.H., Lowry, M.B., 2014. Comparing spatial metrics that quantify urban form.

Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 44, 59–67.

Lynch, K., Rodwin, L., 1958. A theory of urban form. Journal of the American institute

of planners 24, 201–214.

Mandi´c, M., Tepavˇcevi´c, B., 2015. Analysis of shape grammar application as a tool for

urban design. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 42, 675–687.

Mashhoodi, B., Unceta, P.M., 2024. Urban form and surface temperature inequality in

683 european cities. Sustainable Cities and Society , 105690.

Miao, Y., Koenig, R., Knecht, K., Konieva, K., Buˇs, P., Chang, M.C., 2018. Computa-
tional urban design prototyping: Interactive planning synthesis methods—a case study
in cape town. International Journal of Architectural Computing 16, 212–226.

Moudon, A.V., 1997. Urban morphology as an emerging interdisciplinary field. Urban

morphology 1, 3–10.

O’Neill, R.V., Krummel, J., Gardner, R.e.a., Sugihara, G., Jackson, B., DeAngelis, D.,
Milne, B., Turner, M.G., Zygmunt, B., Christensen, S., et al., 1988. Indices of landscape
pattern. Landscape ecology 1, 153–162.

Pan, X.Z., Zhao, Q.G., Chen, J., Liang, Y., Sun, B., 2008. Analyzing the variation of
building density using high spatial resolution satellite images: the example of shanghai
city. Sensors 8, 2541–2550.

Pan˜ao, M.J.O., Gon¸calves, H.J., Ferr˜ao, P.M., 2008. Optimization of the urban build-
ing efficiency potential for mid-latitude climates using a genetic algorithm approach.
Renewable Energy 33, 887–896.

Rakha, T., Reinhart, C., 2012. Generative urban modeling: a design work flow for

walkability-optimized cities. Proceedings of SimBuild 5, 255–262.

Ratti, C., Raydan, D., Steemers, K., 2003. Building form and environmental performance:

archetypes, analysis and an arid climate. Energy and buildings 35, 49–59.

Rode, P., Keim, C., Robazza, G., Viejo, P., Schofield, J., 2014. Cities and energy:
urban morphology and residential heat-energy demand. Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design 41, 138–162.

Rybarczyk, G., Wu, C., 2014. Examining the impact of urban morphology on bicycle

mode choice. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 41, 272–288.

Scheer, B.C., 2016. The epistemology of urban morphology. Urban morphology 20, 5–17.

Shen, X., Ye, X., 2024. Environmental performance driven optimization of urban modular
housing layout in singapore. Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering
, 1–14.

30

Shi, Z., Fonseca, J.A., Schlueter, A., 2017. A review of simulation-based urban form
generation and optimization for energy-driven urban design. Building and Environment
121, 119–129.

Soliman, A., Mackay, A., Schmidt, A., Allan, B., Wang, S., 2018. Quantifying the geo-
graphic distribution of building coverage across the us for urban sustainability studies.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 71, 199–208.

Stouffs, R., Rafiq, Y., 2015. Generative and evolutionary design exploration. AI EDAM

29, 329–331.

Tsai, Y.H., 2005. Quantifying urban form: compactness versus’ sprawl’. Urban studies

42, 141–161.

Vermeulen, T., K¨ampf, J.H., Beckers, B., 2013. Urban form optimization for the energy
performance of buildings using citysim. Proceedings of CISBAT 2013 cleantech for
smart cities and buildings , 915–920.

Wan, Y., Du, H., Yuan, L., Xu, X., Tang, H., Zhang, J., 2024. Exploring the influ-
ence of block environmental characteristics on land surface temperature and its spatial
heterogeneity for a high-density city. Sustainable Cities and Society , 105973.

Wang, X., Song, Y., Tang, P., 2020. Generative urban design using shape grammar and

block morphological analysis. Frontiers of Architectural Research 9, 914–924.

Wilson, L., Danforth, J., Davila, C.C., Harvey, D., 2019. How to generate a thousand
master plans: A framework for computational urban design. SimAUD 2019 , 113–119.

Wu, Q., Guo, F., Li, H., Kang, J., 2017. Measuring landscape pattern in three dimensional

space. Landscape and Urban Planning 167, 49–59.

Xu, J., Li, B., 2019. Application of Case-Based Methods and Information Technology
in Urban Design - The Renewal Design of the urban region around Roma Railway
Station, in: CAADRIA 2019: Intelligent & Informed, Wellington, New Zealand. pp.
625–634. doi:10.52842/conf.caadria.2019.1.625.

Yang, L., Yang, X., Zhang, H., Ma, J., Zhu, H., Huang, X., 2022. Urban morphological
regionalization based on 3d building blocks—a case in the central area of chengdu,
china. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 94, 101800.

Yi, Y.K., Kim, H., 2015. Agent-based geometry optimization with genetic algorithm (ga)

for tall apartment’s solar right. Solar Energy 113, 236–250.

Yin, C., Yuan, M., Lu, Y., Huang, Y., Liu, Y., 2018. Effects of urban form on the urban
heat island effect based on spatial regression model. Science of the Total Environment
634, 696–704.

Yu, S., Chen, Z., Yu, B., Wang, L., Wu, B., Wu, J., Zhao, F., 2020. Exploring the
relationship between 2d/3d landscape pattern and land surface temperature based on
explainable extreme gradient boosting tree: A case study of shanghai, china. Science
of the Total Environment 725, 138229.

31

Yu, W., Li, B., Jia, H., Zhang, M., Wang, D., 2015. Application of multi-objective genetic
algorithm to optimize energy efficiency and thermal comfort in building design. Energy
and Buildings 88, 135–143.

Zhang, H., Dana, K., Shi, J., Zhang, Z., Wang, X., Tyagi, A., Agrawal, A., 2018. Con-
text encoding for semantic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7151–7160.

Zhang, J., Xu, L., Shabunko, V., Tay, S.E.R., Sun, H., Lau, S.S.Y., Reindl, T., 2019.
Impact of urban block typology on building solar potential and energy use efficiency
in tropical high-density city. Applied Energy 240, 513–533.

Zhang, P., Ghosh, D., Park, S., 2023. Spatial measures and methods in sustainable urban

morphology: A systematic review. Landscape and Urban Planning 237, 104776.

Zhang, X., Wang, X., Du, S., Tian, S., Jia, A., Ye, Y., Gao, N., Kuang, X., Shi, X., 2024.
A systematic review of urban form generation and optimization for performance-driven
urban design. Building and Environment , 111269.

Zhao, K., Gou, Z., 2023.

Influence of urban morphology on facade solar potential in
mixed-use neighborhoods: Block prototypes and design benchmark. Energy and Build-
ings 297, 113446.

Zhou, L., Yuan, B., Hu, F., Wei, C., Dang, X., Sun, D., 2022. Understanding the effects
of 2d/3d urban morphology on land surface temperature based on local climate zones.
Building and Environment 208, 108578.

32

Appendix A. Evaluating morphology metrics by comparison

This appendix is a supplementary to section 4.2, showing the urban form retrieval

results by comparing 5 morphology metric sets.

33

Figure A.12: The 3D block-scale models are retrieved based on the distance between SOMEmbedding
vectors, comparing the performance of the 5 morphology metric sets for cases 3 and 5.

34

Figure A.13: The 3D block-scale models are retrieved based on the distance between SOMEmbedding
vectors, comparing the performance of the 5 morphology metric sets for cases 6 and 7.

35

Figure A.14: The 3D block-scale models are retrieved based on the distance between SOMEmbedding
vectors, comparing the performance of the 5 morphology metric sets for case 9.

36

