Highlights

Urban Forms Across Continents: A Data-Driven Comparison of Lausanne
and Philadelphia

Arthur Carm`es, L´eo Catteau, Andrew Sonta, Arash Tavakoli

• This study introduces a scalable, open-source clustering framework that lever-
ages OpenStreetMap data to classify and compare neighborhood-level urban
forms across international cities.

• By applying this method to Philadelphia and Lausanne, we identify both
shared and city-specific neighborhood typologies shaped by walkability, access
to amenities, green space, and multimodal infrastructure.

• The findings demonstrate the importance of context-aware design and analysis
when comparing cities, highlighting how local urban morphology influences the
interpretation and transferability of neighborhood cluster patterns.

5
2
0
2

y
a
M
5

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
3
9
2
0
.
5
0
5
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Urban Forms Across Continents: A Data-Driven Comparison
of Lausanne and Philadelphia

Arthur Carm`esa, L´eo Catteaua, Andrew Sontaa, Arash Tavakolib

aEngineering and Technology for Human-Oriented Sustainability (ETHOS) Lab, Ecole
Polytechnique Federal de Lausanne (EPFL), HBL 1 3B (Halle Bleue), Fribourg, 1700, Switzerland
bHuman Centered Cities Lab, Villanova University, 800 E Lancaster
Ave, Villanova, 19085, PA, USA

Abstract

Understanding urban form is crucial for sustainable urban planning and enhanc-
ing quality of life. This study presents a data-driven framework to systematically
identify and compare urban typologies across geographically and culturally distinct
cities. Using open-source geospatial data from OpenStreetMap, we extracted multidi-
mensional features related to topography, multimodality, green spaces, and points of
interest for the cities of Lausanne, Switzerland, and Philadelphia, USA. A grid-based
approach was used to divide each city into Basic Spatial Units (BSU), and Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMM) were applied to cluster BSUs based on their urban charac-
teristics. The results reveal coherent and interpretable urban typologies within each
city, with some cluster types emerging across both cities despite their differences
in scale, density, and cultural context. Comparative analysis showed that adapting
the grid size to each city’s morphology improves the detection of shared typologies.
Simplified clustering based solely on network degree centrality further demonstrated
that meaningful structural patterns can be captured even with minimal feature sets.
Our findings suggest the presence of functionally convergent urban forms across con-
tinents and highlight the importance of spatial scale in cross-city comparisons. The
framework offers a scalable and transferable approach for urban analysis, provid-
ing valuable insights for planners and policymakers aiming to enhance walkability,
accessibility, and well-being. Limitations related to data completeness and feature
selection are discussed, and directions for future work—including the integration of
additional data sources and human-centered validation—are proposed.

Email addresses: andrew.sonta@epfl.ch (Andrew Sonta), arash.tavakoli@villanova.edu

(Arash Tavakoli)

Preprint submitted to XXXXXXX

May 7, 2025

Keywords: Walkability, Clustering, Cities, Urban Forms

1. Introduction

Urbanization is a global phenomenon that shapes the socioeconomic and environ-
mental landscapes of cities worldwide [1]. As cities expand and evolve, understanding
the underlying patterns of their spatial organization becomes crucial for sustainable
urban planning and the enhancement of residents’ quality of life [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. A
fundamental aspect of this spatial organization is the concept of urban form, which
encompasses the physical layout, infrastructure, land use, and the distribution of
amenities within a city [7, 8, 9]. Urban form significantly influences various out-
comes, including well-being, walkability, environmental sustainability, and social co-
hesion [9, 10, 11].

A pertinent question in urban studies is whether urban forms exhibit similarities
across different countries and continents [12, 13, 14, 15]. Despite the vast diver-
sity in cultural, economic, and geographical contexts, there may exist underlying
universal principles that govern the spatial organization of cities. Identifying such
similarities can facilitate the transfer of best practices in urban planning and foster a
deeper understanding of the factors that contribute to successful urban environments.
However, comparing urban forms across diverse contexts poses several challenges, in-
cluding variations in data availability, differing urban scales, and the complexity of
capturing multifaceted urban characteristics [12, 13, 14, 15]. In this context, there is
a pressing need for robust, data-driven methodologies that can objectively evaluate
and compare urban forms on a global scale.

This paper presents a novel methodological framework for comparing urban forms
across cities enabling comparisons between different countries and continents using
advanced clustering algorithms applied on open source available dataset of cities of
interest. Leveraging the extensive geospatial data available through OpenStreetMap
(OSM), we extract a comprehensive set of features related to urban forms, including
topography, multimodality, green spaces, and points of interest. By employing a
grid-based approach, cities are then divided into Basic SPatial Units (BSU), each
characterized by the extracted features. We then apply Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMM) to cluster these BSUs, identifying distinct urban typologies based on their
urban form profiles. To demonstrate the efficacy and versatility of our method, we
apply it to two geographically and culturally distinct cities: Philadelphia, USA, and
Lausanne, Switzerland. These cities differ significantly in size, urban layout, and
demographic composition, providing a rigorous test for our clustering approach. The
resulting clusters reveal both unique and shared urban form typologies, offering in-

2

sights into the commonalities and differences in urban forms across continents. The
remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 4 outlines the data collection
process, feature extraction, grid generation, and clustering methodology. Section 5
presents the clustering outcomes for both cities, accompanied by qualitative and
quantitative analyses. Finally, Section 6 discusses the implications of our findings,
and Section 9 concludes the paper by summarizing key insights and suggesting di-
rections for future research.

2. Background and Literature Review

Understanding urban form is a foundational element in the study of cities, influ-
encing patterns of mobility, land use, accessibility, and quality of life. Urban form
broadly encompasses the spatial configuration and structure of built environments,
including street networks, land parcels, public spaces, and the distribution of ameni-
ties [16, 7, 17]. The relationship between urban form and walkability, in particular,
has been extensively studied due to its implications for sustainability, public health,
and transportation planning [18, 19, 20].

It has been found that the structure of the urban form has a significant impact on
mobility behavior and the experiences of urban residents. The concept of accessibility
is linked primarily to the urban form itself, with key elements including density, mix
of land use, and the path network [21, 22, 23]. The concept of accessibility is often
expanded to include additional factors that may impact the experience of the users
of the city, including green space, materiality, and urban amenities like benches
[24]. When taken all together, and when considered from the perspective of the city
dweller, it is clear that a diverse and broad range of attributes come together to
create the characteristics of urban form. It can therefore be difficult to describe the
overall characteristic of a particular part of a city, and even more difficult to compare
different places with each other.

Understanding the different types of urban forms that exist within a city can
provide critical insights for urban planners and policymakers aiming to enhance
walkability, accessibility, and quality of life [25, 18, 19, 20]. While urban form is
a latent construct—meaning it cannot be captured by a single variable but is instead
manifested through a combination of measurable indicators such as land use, street
networks, and access to amenities—it varies significantly within and across cities
[26]. In line with this matter, various studies analyzed indicators of urban forms and
attempted to classify urban spaces using these indicators. For instance, [27] proposed
a machine learning-based framework to characterize urban morphology using street
patterns, showing that variations in network structure alone can reveal distinct mor-
phological types even in the absence of broader contextual features. In another recent

3

work, [28] analyzed street network data from 326 Chinese cities and identified six
core dimensions—such as connectedness, intensity, and network transitivity—that
effectively describe variations in urban form. By proposing a streamlined and scal-
able set of street-based metrics, their framework enables consistent characterization
of urban morphology across cities of different sizes.

However, much of the existing literature has approached this challenge by focus-
ing on a limited set of indicators—such as building density, land use mix, or road
network structure—rather than capturing urban form as a holistic and multidimen-
sional construct. This fragmented approach can obscure the complex interactions
between built environment features that collectively shape urban experience. As a
result, there remains a need for more comprehensive frameworks that incorporate a
wide range of spatial, infrastructural, and functional characteristics when classifying
urban form through clustering and other data-driven methods.

Using machine learning and novel artificial intelligence based methods, we can
detect urban forms from a set of features in a data-driven fashion. In this regard,
clustering approaches emerge as one of the most important methods in identifying
urban forms across cities and between different cities. The problem of clustering
observations into similar groups without any known labels is a form of unsupervised
learning. Clustering applied to spatial data is a particular subset of this problem,
and researchers have shown that traditional machine learning algorithms such as
k-means, GMMs, and k-medoids can be useful when the data structures allow their
use [29, 30]. More specific methods for spatial data clustering have been developed
when data structures are complex or the expected data sizes are prohibitively large
[31].

Researchers have found that distinct patterns of urban forms can be found both
within and across cities. Analyzing differences in street networks among cities from
around the world can reveal insights on regularity of planning as well as which cities
are similar to others, though this analysis has been limited to the urban characteristic
of the network of paths [32]. Similarly, other researchers have employed clustering to
determine similarity of different cities using building footprints [33]. These across-city
studies have often looked a large number of cities because their task involves treating
each city as an individual observation. Within cities, researchers have taken similar
approaches, focusing on single data modalities like street networks or building foot-
prints to cluster neighborhoods [29]. These studies typically focus on neighborhoods
within individual cities. However, there remain a need for a clustering methodology
that (1) incorporates a wide range of urban form features that would be expected
to impact our experiences of being in a city, including our mobility decisions and
well-being, and (2) is flexible enough to be able to find clusters of areas both within

4

cities and to compare regions across cities. Here we focus on comparing many re-
gions within two distinct cities in order to demonstrate our method’s ability to find
clusters within a given city and compare these clusters across cities.

3. Hypothesis and Research Questions

This study aims to investigate whether distinct urban form typologies can be
systematically identified and compared across geographically and culturally diverse
cities using a unified data-driven approach. The motivation stems from a growing
interest in understanding the extent to which urban environments—despite being
shaped by unique local histories, cultures, and planning practices—may still exhibit
common spatial and functional patterns when analyzed through standardized met-
rics.

3.1. Research Questions

The following research questions guide the study:

1. RQ1: Can clustering techniques applied to urban form-related features derived
from OpenStreetMap effectively identify meaningful neighborhood typologies
within individual cities?

2. RQ2: Are some of these urban typologies shared across different cities, sug-

gesting transferable spatial patterns?

3. RQ3: How does the choice of spatial resolution (i.e., grid size) influence the
identification and comparability of clusters across cities with differing physical,
demographic, and infrastructural characteristics?

4. RQ4: Do similarities in feature distributions across cities contribute to the

emergence of common cluster types in geographically distant contexts?

3.2. Hypotheses

The study is grounded on the following hypotheses:

• H1: GMM clustering applied to spatially distributed urban form features will
produce coherent and interpretable clusters within each city, representing dis-
tinct neighborhood typologies.

• H2: Certain cluster types will be shared across Lausanne and Philadelphia,
indicating the presence of globally relevant urban patterns despite differing
geographic and cultural contexts.

5

• H3: Allowing for adaptive grid resolution per city will improve the alignment
of cluster structures across cities by accounting for variations in urban scale
and density, due to the fact that cities spatial distributions are different.

• H4: Similarities in urban form-related feature distributions across cities will

correlate with the emergence of consistent urban clusters in both cases.

4. Methods

The following section outlines our methodology involving data collection, pre-
processing, and clustering procedure. We also provide a discussion on the rational
behind the choice of number of clusters.

4.1. Data Collection

The first step in this study is the acquisition of the datasets required for the
analysis. The goal is to systematically access a series of features that together can
shape urban forms. We utilized OpenStreetMap, a freely available and widely used
platform that provides comprehensive geospatial data. The primary advantage of
using OpenStreetMap is its open-access nature, allowing researchers to easily obtain
detailed information on urban infrastructure, natural features, and points of inter-
est. Additionally, its global coverage ensures that the methodology developed in this
study can be readily adapted to different cities by simply modifying the geographic
location, thus enhancing the transferability and scalability of the approach. The
code for accessing these features is open source and available at the author’s Github
repository [citation removed for double blind]. Various features can be captured from
OpenStreetMap to comprehensively assess various aspects of urban forms. These as-
pects were categorized into four primary domains, which reflect the multidimensional
nature of urban forms. We note that these features are not an exhaustive list and
other new features be added to this list; however, for brevity, we only focus on a
handful of such features:

• Topography: This category encompasses data describing the structure and
layout of the street network. Key features include road classifications (e.g.,
residential, primary, and pedestrian-only streets) and measures of network cen-
trality, which influence the ease and efficiency of pedestrian movement within
an urban area.

• Multi-modality: Urban forms often interacts with other modes of transporta-
tion. This domain captures features such as the number of public transport

6

stops, the presence of cycleways, and crosswalks. These elements illustrate
how pedestrian infrastructure integrates with other transportation systems to
facilitate seamless mobility.

• Green Spaces and Natural Elements: Natural features and greenery en-
hance walkability by improving environmental quality and providing recre-
ational opportunities. Data in this category include tree density, wooded areas,
beaches, and other natural features. Water bodies such as rivers, lakes, and
harbors are also included to account for their contribution to the aesthetic and
functional aspects of urban spaces.

• Points of Interest: This category includes destinations that attract pedes-
trian activity, such as supermarkets, schools, offices, libraries, and recreational
areas. These points serve as critical nodes in origin-destination matrices and
influence patterns of pedestrian movement.

4.2. Preprocessing and Generation of Analysis Grid Element

To facilitate spatial clustering, the administrative boundary of the city under
analysis is divided into a grid of elementary areas referred to as BSU. In this study,
a hexagonal grid structure is employed for defining the BSUs. Hexagonal grids
offer distinct advantages, such as uniform distances between neighboring units and
the ability to approximate circular regions through expanding rings of neighbors.
These properties contribute to smoother spatial paving and reduced variability in
outcomes associated with grid size, making hexagonal grids particularly suitable for
urban analysis.

In addition to the choice of grid shape, the size of the grid cells is a critical con-
sideration that directly influences the effectiveness of spatial clustering. The grid
size must balance two competing objectives: it should be fine enough to capture the
local structure and unique urban typologies while remaining large enough to avoid
trivial or overly granular classifications. The appropriate grid size varies across cities
depending on their specific characteristics and can influence the granularity of the
typologies identified. Furthermore, the selection of grid size affects the spatial res-
olution of the analysis, underscoring the importance of tailoring this parameter to
the study context. The determination of grid size can be guided by prior domain
knowledge, informed by the characteristics of the urban environment being analyzed.
Alternatively, grid size can be optimized based on quantitative metrics that evaluate
the quality of clustering, such as silhouette scores or other measures of spatial cohe-
sion and separation [34]. In this study, to determine the optimal grid size, we utilize
the silhouette score [34], a metric that assesses the quality of clustering by measuring

7

the cohesion within clusters and the separation between them. The silhouette score
is defined as:

Silhouette Score =

b − a
max(a, b)

(1)

where:

• a is the average distance between a data point and all other points in the same

cluster,

• b is the average distance between a data point and all points in the nearest

neighboring cluster.

A higher silhouette score indicates that the data points are well-clustered, with
clear boundaries between clusters. By maximizing the silhouette score, we select the
grid size that yields the most coherent and well-separated clusters, ensuring that the
discretization size is both meaningful and effective for the analysis.

We note that our primary focus is not on determining the optimal size of the
BSU, but rather on demonstrating the flexibility and applicability of the clustering
methodology itself. However, it is important to acknowledge that the choice of BSU
size can influence the granularity of the resulting clusters, as finer grids capture more
localized urban features while coarser grids aggregate broader spatial patterns. The
presented framework is adaptable to any BSU size, and users can tailor the grid
resolution depending on the specific objectives of their study, the scale of the city,
or the level of detail desired in the analysis

For each BSU, we calculate values for the selected features based on the data
available within its boundaries. These values can be aggregated as total counts
for extensive features (e.g., the number of trees or public transport stops) or as
average values for intensive features (e.g., road centrality measures). This ensures
that the data for each feature is appropriately represented and standardized across
all BSUs. Once the data has been processed and aggregated, it is organized into
a matrix format, where rows correspond to individual BSUs and columns represent
the selected urban form related features.

4.3. Clustering

In order to perform clustering, we leverage GMM due to their efficacy in mod-
eling complex, multimodal distributions commonly present in urban spatial data.
GMMs are applied to BSUs based on their aggregated urban form features. GMMs

8

are well-known for their flexibility in representing data as a combination of multi-
ple Gaussian distributions, each corresponding to a distinct cluster or underlying
generative process.

Mathematically, the probability density function of a GMM is expressed as:

p(x|λ) =

K
(cid:88)

k=1

πkN (x|µk, Σk),

(2)

where:

• x is a data point in the feature space,

• K is the number of Gaussian components,

• πk represents the mixing coefficient for the k-th Gaussian component, satisfying

(cid:80)K

k=1 πk = 1,

• N (x|µk, Σk) denotes the multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean vector

µk and covariance matrix Σk.

The Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is utilized to estimate the pa-
rameters λ = πk, µk, Σkk = 1K of the mixture model. The EM algorithm iteratively
performs two main steps:

1. Expectation (E-step): Calculates the posterior probabilities (responsibili-

ties) that each BSU belongs to each Gaussian component.

2. Maximization (M-step): Updates the parameters λ to maximize the ex-

pected log-likelihood of the data given the current responsibilities.

The iterative process continues until convergence, resulting in parameter esti-

mates that best fit the observed feature data.

4.4. Determining the Number of Clusters

Reflective of underlying urban forms, the number of clusters, corresponding to
the number of Gaussian distributions in the mixture model, is a fundamental hy-
perparameter in GMMs. To identify the optimal number of clusters, we employ the
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), which provides a balance between model fit
and complexity [35]. The BIC is mathematically defined as:

BIC = k ln(N ) − 2 ln( ˆL),

(3)

where:

9

• k is the number of parameters in the model,

• N is the number of data points,

• ˆL denotes the maximized value of the likelihood function for the model.

.

By calculating the BIC for various numbers of clusters, we select the model that
minimizes the BIC value. This selection criterion ensures an optimal balance between
the accuracy of the clustering and the simplicity of the model, thereby mitigating
the risk of overfitting by favoring models with fewer clusters when appropriate.

5. Case Study of Philadelphia and Lausanne

Based on the developed framework, we are interested in applying it to two cities
located on different continents, each with distinct urban forms, population densi-
ties, and cultural influences. Lausanne, situated in Switzerland, represents a com-
pact, European city characterized by its hilly terrain, historical architecture, and
pedestrian-friendly urban planning. In contrast, Philadelphia, located in the United
States, is a larger metropolitan area with a grid-based urban layout, diverse neighbor-
hoods, and a mix of historic and modern infrastructure. These differences provide
an ideal opportunity to test the robustness of the framework in capturing urban
typologies and comparing urban form features across geographically and culturally
distinct contexts. By applying the developed clustering approach, we aim to identify
patterns that reveal the extent to which urban forms characteristics align or differ
between Lausanne and Philadelphia. This comparison not only highlights how cities
on different continents meet the needs of their inhabitants but also informs whether
universal urban design principles can be derived from these observations.

We start by retrieving the data features based on the framework provided in the
methodology. More specifically, the selected features for each category are summa-
rized in Table 1, offering a comprehensive overview of the variables used to assess
urban forms in the context of this research. These features are extracted for Lausanne
and Philadelphia.

10

Category

Subcategory

Feature

Topography

Highway

Walk

Public Trans-
port
Highway

Railway

Building

Amenity

Pedestrian
Service
Living Street
Footway
Steps
Path
Degree Centrality

city.count feature([’highway’,’pedestrian’])
city.count feature([’highway’,’service’])
city.count feature([’highway’,’living street’])
city.count feature([’highway’,’footway’])
city.count feature([’highway’,’steps’])
city.count feature([’highway’,’path’])
city.network feature(’walk’, ’degree centrality’,’extensive’)

-

city.count feature([’public transport’])

Multimodality

Bus Stop
Cycleway
Crossing
Subway Entrance

city.count feature([’highway’,’bus stop’])
city.count feature([’highway’,’cycleway’])
city.count feature([’highway’,’crossing’])
city.count feature([’railway’,’subway entrance’])

Residential
Commercial
Public
School
Church
University
Train Station
Parking
Restaurant
Cafe
Bar
Pub
Theatre
Cinema
Library
Hospital
Pharmacy
Doctors

Points of Interest

city.count feature([’building’,’residential’])
city.count feature([’building’,’commercial’])
city.count feature([’building’,’public’])
city.count feature([’building’,’school’])
city.count feature([’building’,’church’])
city.count feature([’building’,’university’])
city.count feature([’building’,’train station’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’parking’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’restaurant’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’cafe’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’bar’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’pub’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’theatre’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’cinema’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’library’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’hospital’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’pharmacy’])
city.count feature([’amenity’,’doctors’])

Natural elements

Natural

city.count feature([’natural’])
Based on the silhouette score analysis proposed in our framework, the following

-

grid sizes were chosen for this study. :

City

Grid size (m)

Philadelphia
Lausanne

1500
450

Table 1: Grid size of selected cities.

11

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Grid of hexagonal BSU for (a) Philadelphia with grid size of 1500 m and (b) Lausanne
with grid size 450 m.

Following our analysis framework, the optimal number of cluster for the selected

grid size for both cities is given in the table 2.

City

Grid size (m) # clusters (-)

Philadelphia
Lausanne

1500
450

7
5

Table 2: Grid size of selected cities.

12

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Results of GMM clustering for (a) Philadelphia with 8 clusters (grid size of 1500 m) and
(b) Lausanne with 5 clusters (grid size of 450 m).

5.1. Quantitative Analysis of Cluster Composition

To further explore the nature of the identified clusters, we employ histogram
representations of the feature distributions. Figures 3 and 4 present stacked his-
tograms depicting the relative importance of the various urban form-related features
within each cluster. The normalized feature values signify each variable’s contribu-
tion to assigning a BSU to a specific cluster. These visual representations facilitate a
comparative analysis of cluster characteristics, highlighting which features exert the
strongest influence on the clustering outcomes and provides a more comprehensive
understanding of the underlying patterns distinguishing one cluster from another. A
detailed interpretation of the clustering results for both cities is given next.

Lausanne. For Lausanne, the most immediately noticeable observation from Fig.
3 is that, although five clusters were identified, only four are clearly visible on the
graph. Cluster 1 (blue) is nearly absent. This can be explained by referring to Table
3, which shows that Cluster 1 is characterized by uniformly low values across all
features. This pattern is consistent with the spatial distribution in Fig. 2b, where
Cluster 1 corresponds to largely unoccupied or undeveloped areas with minimal urban
activity.

Cluster 2 exhibits the highest values across several key features, particularly in
the food and beverage category (e.g., restaurants, caf´es, bars, and pubs). It is also
characterized by a high density of pedestrian streets, public buildings, and public
transportation stops. As shown in Fig. 2b, this cluster corresponds to the Hy-
percenter of Lausanne, a highly active urban area. The grouping of these features

13

into a single cluster aligns with expectations, indicating that the clustering algo-
rithm effectively captured the spatial correlation between the concentration of bars,
pedestrian-friendly infrastructure (e.g., terraces), and accessibility via public trans-
portation.

Cluster 4 is particularly noteworthy due to its high values near the main train
station, including parking facilities, several restaurants, and a moderate presence
of natural features. As shown in Fig. 2b, this cluster corresponds to the area
surrounding Lausanne’s central train station and the adjacent boat terminal. The
presence of natural elements can be attributed to the boat station’s proximity to
the lake and surrounding vegetation. Notably, this cluster also includes a significant
number of restaurants, suggesting a spatial association between major transportation
hubs and food service establishments.

Cluster 3 is characterized by generally lower values across most features, with
modest presence of public transportation stops, churches, and schools. As seen
in Fig. 2b, this cluster represents one of the more typical residential neighbor-
hoods outside the city center and comprises the more dispersed areas of Lausanne.
Its composition reflects a lower-density urban fabric, with fewer commercial and
transportation-related amenities compared to central clusters.

Finally, Cluster 5, which forms the periphery of the hypercenter, is distinguished
by a high density of points of interest, including cinemas, theaters, libraries, hos-
pitals, and active local streets. It is also characterized by a significant number of
bus stops and pedestrian crossings. This spatial pattern aligns with expectations for
areas surrounding the city center, where a diverse range of urban activities is con-
centrated. The distribution of public transport infrastructure in this cluster further
supports its role as a transitional zone connecting the hypercenter with surrounding
neighborhoods.

14

Figure 3: Spider diagram for the GMM with 5 clusters (Lausanne).

Philadelphia. In the case of Philadelphia, one immediately noticeable observation
is that, although seven clusters were identified, only five are visibly represented on
the graph. Clusters 2 (orange) and 4 (red) are nearly absent. This observation is
supported by Table 4, which shows that these two clusters exhibit significantly lower
values across all features compared to the others. Cluster 4, as seen in Fig. 2a,
corresponds to areas dominated by major highways—an element not included in the
clustering features—explaining its lack of prominence on the graph. Cluster 2, on the
other hand, represents the city’s peripheral residential areas, which are characterized
by low point-of-interest density and limited transportation infrastructure.

The most immediately striking cluster is Cluster 7, which stands out due to its rel-
atively high concentration of restaurants, bars, pubs, cinemas, and theaters—indicators
of dynamic and culturally active areas. It also exhibits a high density of commer-
cial buildings and extensive public transportation infrastructure, including subway
stations. As shown in Fig. 2a, this cluster consists of a single cell, suggesting that
it corresponds almost exactly to the hypercenter of Philadelphia, where commercial,
cultural, and transit activities are highly concentrated.

15

Feature

Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Cluster 3 Cluster 4 Cluster 5

highway pedestrian
highway service
highway living street
highway footway
highway steps
highway path
degree centrality
public transport
highway bus stop
highway cycleway
highway crossing
railway subway entrance
building residential
building commercial
building public
building school
building church
building university
building train station
amenity parking
amenity restaurant
amenity cafe
amenity bar
amenity pub
amenity theatre
amenity cinema
amenity library
amenity hospital
amenity pharmacy
amenity doctors
natural

0.170
0.422
0.194
0.373
0.358
0.104
0.394
0.375
0.398
0.198
0.426
0.174
0.070
0.117
0.151
0.255
0.285
0.126
0.081
0.356
0.245
0.200
0.124
0.170
0.152
0.134
0.201
0.213
0.238
0.131
0.261

7.569
0.813
2.952
3.511
5.262
0.567
2.274
4.246
3.530
1.292
3.252
4.033
0.198
1.052
4.134
0.077
4.210
1.748
0.110
0.549
7.510
7.264
6.268
8.433
5.257
1.415
3.807
1.014
4.701
1.810
1.834

0.117
1.316
0.078
0.596
0.510
0.388
0.794
0.629
0.873
0.524
0.923
0.104
0.296
0.309
0.007
0.545
0.750
0.238
0.110
0.855
0.112
0.031
0.062
0.081
0.019
0.134
0.111
0.008
0.372
0.085
0.346

1.731
0.662
0.546
0.919
0.806
0.072
0.754
3.397
1.503
0.012
1.032
2.350
0.194
0.164
1.277
0.116
0.285
0.126
9.055
1.970
2.890
3.394
1.075
0.240
0.170
1.415
0.201
0.213
2.506
1.810
2.121

0.286
1.200
1.622
2.200
1.995
0.277
2.118
1.613
1.617
0.739
1.936
1.441
0.011
0.420
0.991
1.583
0.743
0.623
0.110
1.545
1.053
0.685
0.537
0.486
1.132
1.601
1.595
2.536
0.728
0.801
1.602

Table 3: Values per cluster for Lausanne

16

Another cluster exhibiting notable feature values is Cluster 5. This cluster is
characterized by a high density of theaters, parking facilities, doctors’ offices, and
pharmacies. It also includes a significant number of residential buildings and sub-
way entrances, suggesting a mixed-use urban environment. An interesting dynamic
emerges from this composition: the strong presence of parking in conjunction with
medical services implies the need to accommodate patients who may have limited ac-
cess to or difficulty using public transportation. Conversely, the presence of theaters
and subway entrances points to a more transit-oriented and culturally active context.
As shown in Fig. 2a, this cluster also consists of a single cell, located adjacent to the
city’s hypercenter.

Cluster 6 is characterized by a high concentration of pubs, caf´es, bus stops, and
natural elements. This composition aligns with areas where individuals are more
likely to rely on public transportation to access leisure and outdoor spaces. An
interesting observation from Fig. 2a is that this cluster comprises three spatially
non-contiguous cells, demonstrating the algorithm’s ability to identify similar urban
characteristics across non-adjacent areas. The relatively high number of amenities
within this cluster can be partially attributed to the fact that two of the three cells
are located near the city center, where amenity density is typically higher.

Cluster 3 exhibits generally lower values compared to the previously discussed
clusters, but it maintains moderate representation across a broad range of features.
As illustrated in Fig. 2a, the cells within this cluster correspond primarily to res-
idential areas, characterized by the presence of universities, parking facilities, and
a notable number of pedestrian streets. The distribution of features suggests that
the clustering algorithm effectively captures the typical characteristics of residential
neighborhoods, including educational institutions and housing infrastructure.

17

Figure 4: Spider diagram for the GMM with 8 clusters (Philadelphia).

5.2. Simple dataset, network centrality

We also explored a simplified version of our clustering analysis by considering
only a single key metric—network degree centrality—which captures the connectivity
density of the street network. This exploration serves two purposes: first, to evaluate
whether meaningful urban typologies can still be identified using minimal feature
sets; and second, to understand the role of street network structure alone in shaping
urban form. Degree centrality was selected because it is a dense, globally relevant
measure that directly reflects urban permeability, accessibility, and connectivity.

When clustering BSUs based solely on degree centrality, the method produced
results that were highly interpretable and strongly aligned with known spatial struc-
tures. As illustrated in Figure 5a, the clusters generated for the city of Philadelphia
corresponded clearly to variations in street network density, distinguishing between
highly connected urban cores and more fragmented or suburban peripheral areas.

Furthermore, the distribution of degree centrality values across the identified
clusters exhibited a less skewed and more even profile compared to multi-feature
clustering (Figure 5b). This smoother distribution suggests that degree centrality

18

Feature

Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Cluster 3 Cluster 4 Cluster 5 Cluster 6 Cluster 7

highway pedestrian
highway service
highway living street
highway footway
highway steps
highway path
degree centrality
public transport
highway bus stop
highway cycleway
highway crossing
railway subway entrance
building residential
building commercial
building public
building school
building church
building university
building train station
amenity parking
amenity restaurant
amenity cafe
amenity bar
amenity pub
amenity theatre
amenity cinema
amenity library
amenity hospital
amenity pharmacy
amenity doctors
natural

0.720
0.341
0.036
1.449
0.774
0.017
1.366
0.652
0.136
0.466
1.347
0.153
0.076
0.046
0.710
1.382
0.885
0.080
0.367
0.826
0.560
0.372
0.259
0.418
0.076
0.134
1.030
0.979
0.768
0.032
0.826

0.260
0.363
0.087
0.383
0.270
0.054
0.479
0.370
0.280
0.039
0.375
0.189
0.192
0.139
0.057
0.285
0.230
0.136
0.150
0.378
0.279
0.245
0.267
0.275
0.181
0.134
0.435
0.240
0.313
0.222
0.167

3.035
0.788
1.687
1.980
0.690
0.012
1.826
1.459
1.510
0.920
1.801
1.186
2.692
0.306
0.057
1.169
1.156
2.181
0.344
2.332
1.769
1.709
2.410
1.366
0.998
0.398
1.530
0.923
1.804
0.573
0.496

0.163
0.521
0.087
0.034
0.144
0.096
0.255
0.287
0.124
0.229
0.028
0.117
0.002
0.060
0.057
0.010
0.110
0.059
0.202
0.023
0.107
0.158
0.070
0.047
0.121
0.022
0.325
0.055
0.045
0.188
0.116

0.530
1.405
0.087
3.800
0.379
0.366
4.214
1.719
2.082
0.863
4.759
8.845
5.720
0.491
0.057
1.080
0.400
0.975
0.184
7.917
4.329
3.164
4.104
3.477
12.121
0.134
4.617
4.092
6.044
6.381
0.335

1.805
1.432
0.087
3.398
3.441
0.343
2.666
1.745
4.170
1.168
3.494
2.430
0.031
4.124
0.057
1.080
4.583
0.048
0.184
3.144
3.631
5.657
3.738
6.291
3.896
3.057
2.933
1.855
1.695
4.168
5.255

3.263
2.465
2.752
3.715
2.088
0.299
3.683
6.514
6.557
0.051
5.014
11.202
0.025
13.435
0.057
2.684
3.886
1.254
0.184
4.887
11.775
9.708
5.752
7.229
6.513
12.628
0.435
6.329
4.739
0.257
0.639

Table 4: Values per cluster for Philadelphia

19

alone provides a strong, consistent signal for differentiating urban spatial structures
without the added complexity or noise introduced by multiple heterogeneous features.
Overall, these results demonstrate that even when constrained to a single fea-
ture, the proposed framework remains effective for uncovering meaningful urban
form typologies. While a richer feature set allows for more nuanced interpretations,
the degree centrality-only analysis highlights the fundamental role of street network
structure as a backbone of urban morphology.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) Visualization of the result of clustering. (b) Distribution of the feature across clusters.

5.3. Qualitative Validation of Clusters

A qualitative approach to evaluate the validity of the identified clusters involves
comparing satellite imagery of randomly selected cells within the same cluster. If
these spatially distant cells exhibit similar structural or land-use characteristics, it
suggests that the clustering algorithm is effectively capturing meaningful and con-
sistent urban features. In the following examples, the selected cells are intentionally
located far apart within each city to reduce the influence of spatial proximity and
better isolate the role of shared feature patterns in driving the clustering outcomes.

Lausanne. Two cells belonging to Cluster4 are presented in Figures6a and 6b. These
areas are characterized by a mix of natural elements—such as vegetation and prox-
imity to water bodies—and major transportation hubs, including train and boat
stations. Additionally, both neighborhoods show a notable presence of restaurants
and hotels. Despite their spatial separation, the land-use patterns are strikingly
similar, indicating that the clustering algorithm consistently identified comparable
urban typologies. These qualitative observations align with the spatial distribution

20

of Cluster4 in Figure2b, and further support the quantitative findings discussed in
Section 5.1.

(a) Satellite view of a first cell in Cluster 4 (Lausanne).

(b) Satellite view of a second cell in Cluster 4 (Lau-
sanne).

Figure 6: (a) and (b) Two distant cells from Cluster 4 in Lausanne. Despite their separation, each
area features similar land-use characteristics, offering qualitative support for the clustering results.

Philadelphia. A comparable qualitative assessment is performed for Philadelphia by
examining two spatially distant cells from Cluster1, shown in Figures7a and 7b. Both
areas are predominantly dense residential neighborhoods characterized by networks
of small streets. Additionally, each location includes recreational facilities—such as
baseball fields in one and tennis courts in the other—and natural features, includ-
ing either a river or scattered tree cover. These shared land-use and infrastructural
elements suggest that Cluster1 consistently captures a specific urban typology, de-
spite local variations. This consistency supports the quantitative findings shown in
Figure2a, further validating the effectiveness of the clustering methodology.

21

(a) Satellite view of a first cell in Cluster 1 (Philadel-
phia).

(b) Satellite view of a second cell in Cluster 1 (Philadel-
phia).

Figure 7: (a) and (b) Two distant cells from Cluster 1 in Philadelphia. Despite their spatial
separation, each location exhibits similarly dense residential patterns and comparable amenities,
adding qualitative support to the clustering.

5.4. Comparative Analysis of Two Cities

A natural question emerging from this analysis is whether the urban typologies
identified in one city are transferable to another. Specifically, do certain cluster
profiles represent universal urban patterns, or are neighborhood characteristics in-
herently city-specific? To explore this, we merge the feature matrices of two distinct
cities—Lausanne and Philadelphia—and apply a single clustering algorithm to the
combined dataset. This approach allows us to assess the extent to which similar
urban forms emerge across different geographic and cultural contexts.

22

Figure 8: Combined clustering result for Lausanne and Philadelphia with a uniform grid size.

Figure 8 demonstrates that some clusters are shared between Lausanne and
Philadelphia when a uniform grid resolution is applied, suggesting the presence of
comparable urban typologies across both cities. However, certain clusters—particularly
Clusters 1 and 2, which are prominent in central Lausanne—are absent from the
Philadelphia portion of the map. This discrepancy indicates that a single grid size
may be insufficient to capture the varying spatial scales and urban structures of cities
with distinct physical layouts and demographic profiles.

23

Figure 9: Combined clustering result for Lausanne and Philadelphia with variable grid sizes.

To address this limitation, we allow each city to be analyzed using an indepen-
dently optimized grid size, as shown in Figure 9. With variable spatial resolutions,
a greater number of shared clusters emerge between Lausanne and Philadelphia, in-
cluding those corresponding to the urban cores of both cities. This result highlights
the importance of adapting grid resolution to the specific spatial and morphological
characteristics of each city.
It reinforces the idea that appropriate scale selection
is critical for accurately capturing comparable urban typologies across diverse geo-
graphic contexts.

Notably, the emergence of shared clusters between two cities located over 6,300
kilometers apart suggests that, when using a consistent set of features, comparable
neighborhood typologies can be identified across distinct urban contexts. It is inter-
esting to observe that, according to the data used for clustering, two BSUs within one
city can be considered less alike than two BSUs located on two different continents
This finding demonstrates the generalizability of the proposed clustering approach,
which can be applied to multiple cities without requiring substantial methodolog-
ical modifications. Further supporting this conclusion, Figure 10 illustrates that
many walkability-related features exhibit similar distributions in both Lausanne and
Philadelphia. These parallels in feature distributions help explain the consistent ap-
pearance of certain cluster types across the two urban environments. Overall, these
findings highlight that, when spatial resolution is appropriately tailored to each city’s
urban morphology, a unified clustering framework can effectively identify comparable
neighborhood typologies across diverse urban environments.

24

Figure 10: Excerpt of the distribution of selected features for Lausanne and Philadelphia.

Similarly, we extended the degree centrality-based clustering to the combined
dataset of both Lausanne and Philadelphia to evaluate whether shared urban typolo-
gies based on network structure alone could be identified across cities. As shown in
Figure 11, the clustering results reveal that while certain clusters are shared between
the two cities, some typologies—particularly those characterized by very high street
network degree—appear predominantly in Lausanne. This indicates that, although
both cities contain similarly connected areas, Lausanne exhibits unique patterns of
extremely dense street connectivity that are not as prevalent in Philadelphia.

This observation is further supported by the comparison of degree centrality fea-
ture distributions between the two cities, illustrated in Figure 12a. The distributions
highlight that Lausanne, as a compact and historically evolved European city, tends
to have a more tightly knit street network compared to the broader, orthogonal grid
system characteristic of Philadelphia.

An additional interesting insight emerges from the optimization analysis of the
number of clusters using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), shown in Fig-
ure 12b. Here, we observe that the typologies present in Philadelphia are effectively
captured with approximately five clusters, corresponding to a local minimum in the
BIC curve. However, further increasing the number of clusters improves model fit
predominantly for Lausanne, suggesting greater complexity and finer differentiation
in its street network structure. This result highlights not only the morphological dif-
ferences between the two cities but also reinforces the capacity of degree centrality

25

alone to reveal multi-scalar patterns of urban form in a comparative context.

Figure 11: Gaussian mixture clustering of the degree centrality of Lausanne and Philadelphia
together.

(a)

(b)

Figure 12: (a) Distribution of degree centrality across cities. (b) Optimization of the number of
clusters for two cities.

6. Discussion

This study introduced a scalable, data-driven framework for identifying and com-
paring urban form typologies across cities, using clustering techniques applied to
open-source geospatial features. By leveraging a diverse set of features—from street

26

types and public transport nodes to natural elements and amenities—we demon-
strated that consistent, interpretable urban forms can be derived from cities as geo-
graphically and culturally distinct as Lausanne and Philadelphia. The findings offer
important implications for urban planning practice, methodological approaches in
spatial analysis, and comparative urbanism.

6.1. Identifying Typologies Through Multi-Feature and Centrality-Based Clustering
The use of a comprehensive feature set to define BSU allowed us to capture
complex, multidimensional aspects of urban form. Clusters derived from this ap-
proach aligned well with known urban functions—such as commercial cores, residen-
tial zones, and multimodal nodes—validating both the clustering method and the
selected features, supporting Hypothesis 1 (H1).

At the same time, the supplemental clustering using degree centrality as the sole
feature offered a simplified, yet insightful lens into urban structure. This single-
variable approach produced highly interpretable clusters tied directly to the den-
sity and configuration of street networks. Notably, in Philadelphia, the centrality-
based clustering mirrored known gradients in urban form, from the dense orthogonal
core to more irregular and sparse peripheries. When applied to both Lausanne
and Philadelphia together, the degree centrality clusters revealed both shared and
city-specific morphologies. For instance, high-degree centrality areas in Lausanne ap-
peared unique and more prevalent than in Philadelphia, underscoring how historical
development and topographic constraints shape network efficiency differently across
contexts.

Together, these dual approaches—one holistic and feature-rich, the other mini-
mal and structural—illustrate the versatility of clustering in urban analysis. Degree
centrality, in particular, can serve as a computationally efficient proxy for urban form
when data availability is limited, while still providing interpretable insights.

6.2. Shared Patterns Across Cities and the Role of Scale

One of the key contributions of this study lies in revealing that certain urban
typologies emerge consistently across both cities, especially when grid resolution is
optimized per city, supporting Hypothesis 4 (H4). In the joint clustering analysis, the
application of a single grid resolution yielded fewer shared clusters due to spatial scale
mismatches. However, when grid sizes were adapted to local morphology—450 meters
for Lausanne and 1500 meters for Philadelphia—a broader set of shared cluster types
emerged.

This finding supports Hypothesis 3 (H3) and reinforces the critical role of scale
sensitivity in urban form analysis. Urban morphology is inherently multiscalar, and

27

imposing uniform spatial units can distort the perception of shared structure. Allow-
ing adaptive resolution ensures that clusters reflect local spatial logic while remaining
comparable across contexts. This insight has methodological implications for global
comparative studies and aligns with literature advocating for flexible spatial zoning
in urban analytics [12].

6.3. Functional Convergence and Transferability of Urban Typologies

The emergence of shared clusters across cities with different planning histories,
geographies, and cultures suggests a degree of functional convergence in urban en-
vironments. Central business districts, mixed-use neighborhoods, and transit-rich
corridors appear to coalesce around similar patterns of amenities and infrastruc-
ture—even when separated by thousands of kilometers.

This outcome supports Hypothesis 2 (H2) and echoes broader research suggesting
that, despite regional diversity, certain configurations of urban elements—such as
multimodal access, high centrality, and rich amenity landscapes—support universal
patterns of urban activity and walkability [9, 10]. From a policy perspective, this
implies that design principles validated in one context may hold transferable value
in others, especially when adapted to local scale and density.

6.4. Clustering as a Diagnostic Tool for Planners

The application of clustering, particularly through GMMs, offers a practical di-
agnostic tool for urban planners. By identifying areas that resemble highly walkable,
amenity-rich typologies—or conversely, clusters characterized by poor connectivity
and limited services—interventions can be strategically targeted. For instance, BSUs
that fall into low centrality or low-feature-density clusters could be prioritized for
infrastructure investment, green space development, or mobility enhancements.

Moreover, as the simplified degree centrality analysis shows, even a single fea-
ture can reveal structural inequalities or morphological constraints, helping planners
visualize where urban fabric deviates from well-connected norms. This dual capa-
bility—broad typology identification and granular structural analysis—makes the
framework adaptable to varying levels of data and planning capacity.

6.5. Limitations and Future Directions

While the study provides robust evidence for the utility of spatial clustering in ur-
ban form analysis, several limitations remain. The reliance on OSM data introduces
potential inconsistencies in data completeness, especially for features like pedestrian
crossings or green space, which may be underreported in certain areas. Additionally,
qualitative elements such as perceived safety, lighting, or sidewalk quality—crucial
to walkability—remain unrepresented in this data-driven framework.

28

Future work could expand the model by integrating sensor data, survey responses,
or image-based assessments of the built environment. Furthermore, extending the
approach to include more cities—especially those in the Global South or rapidly
urbanizing regions—would test the generalizability of these findings. Lastly, incor-
porating temporal dynamics to explore how clusters evolve over time could provide
valuable insights into the effects of policy interventions or urban development trends.

7. Limitations

While the study presents a robust framework for clustering urban form based on

walkability features, several limitations must be acknowledged.

Firstly, the reliance on OpenStreetMap (OSM) data introduces inherent limi-
tations related to data completeness and accuracy. Although OSM is a valuable
resource for geospatial information, its data quality can vary significantly across dif-
ferent regions and features. Incomplete or outdated entries may lead to inaccuracies
in the feature set, potentially affecting the clustering outcomes. Future studies could
incorporate additional data sources or validation steps to mitigate these discrepan-
cies.

Secondly, the selection of features, while comprehensive, may not encompass all
dimensions of urban forms. Factors such as sidewalk quality, street lighting, safety,
and pedestrian traffic are critical to walkability and subsequently urban forms but
are challenging to quantify using OSM data alone. The exclusion of these qualitative
aspects may result in an incomplete assessment of walkability. Integrating supple-
mentary data sources, such as surveys or sensor-based measurements, could provide
a more holistic understanding of pedestrian experiences.

Thirdly, the methodological approach, particularly the use of GMM, assumes
that the underlying data distribution can be modeled as a mixture of Gaussian
distributions. While GMMs offer flexibility, they may not capture more complex,
non-Gaussian patterns present in urban data. Alternative clustering algorithms,
such as Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN) or
hierarchical clustering, could be explored to address this limitation.

Additionally, the determination of optimal grid sizes and the number of clusters,
although guided by quantitative metrics such as the Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC) and silhouette scores, remains somewhat subjective. Different optimization
criteria or multi-scale approaches could yield varying results, potentially influencing
the interpretation of walkability typologies. Future research could explore automated
or adaptive grid-sizing techniques to enhance objectivity in this process.

Another limitation pertains to the generalizability of the findings. The study
focuses on two cities with distinct characteristics, but the extent to which the results

29

can be extrapolated to other urban contexts remains uncertain. Cities with vastly
different urban forms, densities, or cultural practices may exhibit unique walkability
profiles that are not captured by the current clustering framework. Expanding the
analysis to include a more diverse set of cities would enhance the robustness and
applicability of the methodology.

Lastly, the study does not incorporate direct feedback from residents or pedestri-
ans, which is crucial for validating the perceived walkability of the identified clusters.
Walkability is inherently subjective, influenced by individual preferences and expe-
riences. Integrating qualitative data from surveys or participatory mapping could
provide valuable insights into how well the clusters align with residents’ perceptions
of walkability, thereby strengthening the study’s conclusions.

8. Future Work

Building on the current study, several promising directions for future work can
be identified to enhance the framework’s robustness, scalability, and applicability to
a wider range of urban contexts.

First, addressing data quality limitations remains a priority. Future research
could integrate multiple open and proprietary data sources to supplement Open-
StreetMap (OSM) information, including municipal datasets, satellite imagery, and
sensor-based urban data. Such integration would allow for the inclusion of qualitative
dimensions of urban form—such as sidewalk conditions, street lighting, or perceived
safety—that are critical for understanding pedestrian experiences but are not fully
captured by OSM alone.

Second, expanding the set of features and incorporating temporal dynamics could
deepen insights into urban form evolution. Including time-sensitive variables, such
as changes in land use, infrastructure upgrades, or seasonal variations in green space
usage, would enable dynamic analyses of how urban typologies develop and transform
over time.

Third, methodological advancements could further refine clustering performance.
Future studies could explore non-parametric clustering techniques, such as DBSCAN
or hierarchical clustering, to relax the Gaussian distribution assumptions inherent
in GMMs. Additionally, adopting multi-scale clustering approaches, where multiple
grid sizes are analyzed concurrently, could provide a richer, more nuanced under-
standing of urban spatial structures.

Fourth, expanding the comparative framework to a broader and more diverse
set of cities—including cities from the Global South, rapidly urbanizing areas, and
smaller towns—would allow a more comprehensive evaluation of the framework’s

30

generalizability and reveal additional urban form typologies that may not be present
in European or North American contexts.

Finally, integrating human-centered validation methods—such as surveys, partic-
ipatory mapping workshops, or mobile sensing studies—would provide critical feed-
back on how well computationally identified clusters align with residents’ lived expe-
riences. This human-in-the-loop approach would strengthen the framework’s utility
for urban planning applications and foster more equitable, resident-informed urban
interventions.

9. Conclusion

This study introduced a flexible, data-driven framework for analyzing and com-
paring urban forms across cities using clustering techniques based on spatial fea-
tures extracted from OpenStreetMap. By applying the methodology to Lausanne
and Philadelphia, we demonstrated that coherent and interpretable urban typologies
can be identified both within and across geographically and culturally distinct cities.
Our results highlight the critical role of scale in comparative urban analysis and show
that even a single metric, such as degree centrality, can reveal meaningful structural
patterns. While limitations exist in terms of data completeness and feature com-
prehensiveness, the framework’s adaptability across datasets, cities, and clustering
approaches offers a strong foundation for future research. Our work contributes a
reproducible method for diagnosing and understanding urban form, with potential
applications in planning, policy-making, and the advancement of more walkable and
sustainable cities.

References

[1] D. Haase, B. G¨uneralp, B. Dahiya, X. Bai, T. Elmqvist, et al., Global urban-
ization, The Urban Planet: Knowledge Towards Sustainable Cities 19 (2018)
326–339.

[2] K. Mouratidis, Urban planning and quality of life: A review of pathways linking

the built environment to subjective well-being, Cities 115 (2021) 103229.

[3] J. L. Kent, S. Thompson, The three domains of urban planning for health and

well-being, Journal of planning literature 29 (3) (2014) 239–256.

[4] A. Tavakoli, I. P. Douglas, H. Y. Noh, J. Hwang, S. L. Billington, Psycho-
behavioral responses to urban scenes: An exploration through eye-tracking,
Cities 156 (2025) 105568.

31

[5] T. Panagopoulos, J. A. G. Duque, M. B. Dan, Urban planning with respect
to environmental quality and human well-being, Environmental pollution 208
(2016) 137–144.

[6] H. Barton, Land use planning and health and well-being, Land use policy 26

(2009) S115–S123.

[7] K. Kropf, Aspects of urban form, Urban morphology 13 (2) (2009) 105–120.

[8] N. Dempsey, C. Brown, S. Raman, S. Porta, M. Jenks, C. Jones, G. Bramley,
Elements of urban form, Dimensions of the sustainable city (2010) 21–51.

[9] A. Rapoport, Human aspects of urban form: towards a man—environment ap-

proach to urban form and design, Elsevier, 2013.

[10] L. D. Frank, P. O. Engelke, The built environment and human activity patterns:
exploring the impacts of urban form on public health, Journal of planning lit-
erature 16 (2) (2001) 202–218.

[11] L. E. Jackson, The relationship of urban design to human health and condition,

Landscape and urban planning 64 (4) (2003) 191–200.

[12] R. Lemoine-Rodr´ıguez, L. Inostroza, H. Zepp, The global homogenization of ur-
ban form. an assessment of 194 cities across time, Landscape and Urban Plan-
ning 204 (2020) 103949.

[13] T. Schwanen, Urban form and commuting behaviour: a cross-european perspec-

tive, Tijdschrift voor economische en sociale geografie 93 (3) (2002) 336–343.

[14] N. Schwarz, Urban form revisited—selecting indicators for characterising euro-

pean cities, Landscape and urban planning 96 (1) (2010) 29–47.

[15] P. Bosselmann, Urban transformation: Understanding city form and design,

Island Press, 2012.

[16] G. Boeing, Measuring the complexity of urban form and design, Urban Design

International 23 (4) (2018) 281–292.

[17] K. Clifton, R. Ewing, G.-J. Knaap, Y. Song, Quantitative analysis of urban
form: a multidisciplinary review, Journal of Urbanism 1 (1) (2008) 17–45.

[18] A. P. Barros, L. M. Mart´ınez, J. M. Viegas, How urban form promotes walka-

bility?, Transportation Research Procedia 27 (2017) 133–140.

32

[19] A. Ak, Urban form and walkability: The assessment of walkability capacity of
ankara, Ph.D. thesis, Middle East Technical University (Turkey) (2018).

[20] S. Lee, J. Koschinsky, E. Talen, Planning tools for walkable neighborhoods:
zoning, land use, and urban form, Journal of architectural and planning research
(2018) 69–88.

[21] J. Chapman, E. Fox, W. Bachman, L. Frank, J. Thomas, A. R. Reyes, Smart Lo-
cation Database Technical Documentation and User Guide (Version 3.0), Tech.
rep., United States Environmental Protection Agency (Jun. 2021).

[22] R. Ewing, R. Cervero, Travel and the Built Environment: A Synthesis, Trans-
portation Research Record 1780 (1) (2001) 87–114, publisher: SAGE Publica-
tions Inc. doi:10.3141/1780-10.
URL https://doi.org/10.3141/1780-10

[23] R. Cervero, K. Kockelman, Travel demand and the 3Ds: Density, diversity,
and design, Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 2 (3)
(1997) 199–219. doi:10.1016/S1361-9209(97)00009-6.
URL
S1361920997000096

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

[24] F. Fonseca, R. , Paulo J. G., C. , Elisa, J. , Mona, P. , George, T. , Simona, ,
R. A. R. Ramos, Built environment attributes and their influence on walkability,
International Journal of Sustainable Transportation 16 (7) (2022) 660–679. doi:
10.1080/15568318.2021.1914793.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2021.1914793

[25] A. Hajrasoulih, V. Del Rio, J. Francis, J. Edmondson, et al., Urban form and
mental wellbeing: Scoping a theoretical framework for action, J. Urban Des.
Ment. Health 5 (10) (2018).

[26] C. Jacobs-Crisioni, M. Kompil, C. Baranzelli, C. Lavalle, Indicators of urban
form and sustainable urban transport, Joint Research Centre, European Com-
mission: Ispra, Italy (2015) 1–36.

[27] C. Wu, J. Wang, M. Wang, M.-J. Kraak, Machine learning-based characteri-
sation of urban morphology with the street pattern, Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems 109 (2024) 102078.

[28] L. Yao, K. Peng, C. Li, Y. Huang, Decoding urban form through street networks:

A nationwide analysis of chinese cities, Cities 158 (2025) 105711.

33

[29] Z. Cao, S. Wang, G. Forestier, A. Puissant, C. F. Eick, Analyzing the com-
position of cities using spatial clustering, in: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM
SIGKDD International Workshop on Urban Computing, UrbComp ’13, As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 1–8.
doi:10.1145/2505821.2505827.
URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2505821.2505827

[30] J. Gil, J. N. Beir˜ao, N. Montenegro, J. P. Duarte, On the discovery of urban
typologies: data mining the many dimensions of urban form, Urban Morphology
16 (1) (2012) 27–40, number: 1. doi:10.51347/jum.v16i1.3966.
URL https://journal.urbanform.org/index.php/jum/article/view/3966

[31] R. Ng, J. Han, CLARANS: a method for clustering objects for spatial data
mining, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 14 (5) (2002)
1003–1016. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2002.1033770.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/1033770

[32] G. Boeing, Urban spatial order:

street network orientation, configuration,
doi:10.1007/

and entropy, Applied Network Science 4 (1) (2019) 67.
s41109-019-0189-1.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s41109-019-0189-1

[33] X. Fan, R. Chen, Y. Lin, Quantifying the Similarity of Urban Forms through
the Building Morphology Complexity Index, in: Proceedings of the 11th ACM
International Conference on Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cities, and
Transportation, BuildSys ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 2024, pp. 204–208. doi:10.1145/3671127.3698187.
URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3671127.3698187

[34] K. R. Shahapure, C. Nicholas, Cluster quality analysis using silhouette score, in:
2020 IEEE 7th international conference on data science and advanced analytics
(DSAA), IEEE, 2020, pp. 747–748.

[35] J. Zhao, L. Jin, L. Shi, Mixture model selection via hierarchical bic, Computa-

tional Statistics & Data Analysis 88 (2015) 139–153.

10. Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the Villanova University College of Engineering

Faculty Career Development Award for supporting this work.

34

11. Supplementary results

11.1. Example of complete set of results for Philadelphia

(a)

(b)

Figure 13: (a) Optimization of the number of clusters. (b) Visualization of the result of clustering.

Figure 14: Distribution of the values of features over the different clusters.

35

Figure 15: Correlation matrix of the features grouped by categories.

Figure 16: Distribution of the values of features grouped by categories over the different clusters.

36

11.2. Example of complete set of results for Lausanne

(a)

(b)

Figure 17: (a) Optimization of the number of clusters. (b) Visualization of the result of clustering.

Figure 18: Distribution of the values of features over the different clusters.

37

Figure 19: Correlation matrix of the features grouped by categories.

Figure 20: Distribution of the values of features grouped by categories over the different clusters.
Probably exhibits a clustering too much influenced by natural elements.

38

